---
layout: post
title: "The gospels' glad tidings of sending Muhammad and Allah's showing the lies of the Christians and Jews"
publisher: "alsalafiyyah@icloud.com"
source: "Fatawa Al-Lajnah Ad-Da'imah no. 11419"
hijri: Muharram 8, 1442 AH
date: 2020/08/27
category: ["prophets", non-muslims]
shaykhs: 
 - Shaykh Abdul-'Aziz ibn 'Abdullah ibn Baz
 - Shaykh Abdul-Razzaq al-Afify
 - Shaykh Abdullah ibn Ghudayyan
---

Question: 

A friend of mine sent me a pamphlet and I have enclosed a copy of it. Would you please answer the following questions:

The preacher that was mentioned says that the Qur'an clearly refers to the Injil (Gospel) and the Christians. In the Qur'an, it is mentioned that the Injil includes guidance and light (Surah Al-Ma'idah 5:46); that the Injil is a guidance for all mankind (Surah Al `Imran 3:34); that the Jews and the Christians read Divine Books (Surah Al-Baqarah, 2:113); that the Christians should be judged according to the Injil (Surah Al-Ma'idah 5:47); and that if Muhammad has any doubts regarding the Qur'an, he should refer to the People of the Book (the Jews and the Christians) (Surah Yunus, 10:94). It is never mentioned in the Qur'an that the Injil had been distorted or that it is not trustworthy. If the Injil had been distorted, as many Muslims claim, it would not have been mentioned in the Qur'an that the Christians are People of the Book and that they read a Divine Book. If the Injil had been distorted or lifted to the heaven, as many Muslims claim, the Qur'an would not have advised the Christians to refer to the Injil as a judge, as it would not make sense for the Qur'an to tell the Christians to refer to an Injil that was distorted or lifted to the heaven. If the Injil had been distorted, the Qur'an would not have advised Muhammad to refer to the People of the Book. Did Muhammad ever have any doubts concerning the Qur'an?

Answer:

#### Answer to question: "**The Qur'an clearly refers to the Injil and the Christians, and mentions that the Injil includes guidance and light, and that it was revealed as guidance for all humans (Surah Al 'Imran 3:34)?**"

Allah mentions the Injil in the Qur'an and asks its people to judge according to what was revealed by Allah in it, to believe in the good news Allah sent of the mission of Muhammad (peace be upon him), and the obligation of believing in it. Allah even took a strong covenant from every prophet to believe in all the Messengers that He sent after him. It was therefore made obligatory for 'Isa (Jesus, peace be upon him) and his Ummah (nation) to believe in Muhammad (peace be upon him) when he was sent, as his Message was general, for all people, as Allah says: "**And We have sent down to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) the Book (this Qur’ân) in truth, confirming the Scripture that came before it and Muhaymin (trustworthy in highness and a witness) over it (old Scriptures). So judge among them by what Allâh has revealed, and follow not their vain desires.**" [al-Maidah: 48]

Allah tells us that He revealed the Qur'an to confirm the previous Divine Books and prevail over them; it confirms what Allah wants to confirm and abrogates what He wants to abrogate. Allah praises those who believed in it from the People of the Book, whether they were the Jews or Christians, and He censures those who did not believe in it, broke the covenant, and disobeyed the commands of their Lord. Allah says: "**And had the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) believed, it would have been better for them; among them are some who have faith, but most of them are Al-Fâsiqûn (disobedient to Allâh and rebellious against Allâh’s Command). They will do you no harm, barring a trifling annoyance; and if they fight against you, they will show you their backs, and they will not be helped.**" [Aal Imran: 110-111]

Up to His Saying: "**Not all of them are alike; a party of the people of the Scripture stand for the right, they recite the Verses of Allâh during the hours of the night, prostrating themselves in prayer. They believe in Allâh and the Last Day; they enjoin Al-Ma‘rûf (Islâmic Monotheism, and following Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) and forbid Al-Munkar (polytheism, disbelief and opposing Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم); and they hasten in (all) good works; and they are among the righteous. And whatever good they do, nothing will be rejected of them; for Allâh knows well those who are Al-Muttaqûn (the pious - See V.2:2).**" [Aal Imran: 113-115]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**...and you will find the nearest in love to the believers (Muslims) those who say: “We are Christians.” That is because amongst them are priests and monks, and they are not proud. And when they (who call themselves Christians) listen to what has been sent down to the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of the truth they have recognised. They say: "Our Lord! We believe; so write us down among the witnesses. And why should we not believe in Allâh and in that which has come to us of the truth (Islâmic Monotheism)? And we wish that our Lord will admit us (in Paradise on the Day of Resurrection) along with the righteous people (Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم and his Companions رضي الله عنهم)." So because of what they said, Allâh rewarded them Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise), they will abide therein forever. Such is the reward of Al-Muhsinûn (the good-doers).**" [al-Maidah: 82-85]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Fight against those who (1) believe not in Allâh, (2) nor in the Last Day, (3) nor forbid that which has been forbidden by Allâh and His Messenger Muhammad (صلى الله عليه وسلم) (4) and those who acknowledge not the religion of truth (i.e. Islâm) among the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), until they pay the Jizyah with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued.**" [al-tawbah: 29]

Up to His Saying: "**They (Jews and Christians) took their rabbis and their monks to be their lords besides Allâh (by obeying them in things which they made lawful or unlawful according to their own desires without being ordered by Allâh), and (they also took as their Lord) Messiah, son of Maryam (Mary), while they (Jews and Christians) were commanded [in the Taurât (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel)] to worship none but One Ilâh (God - Allâh) Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). Praise and glory be to Him (far above is He) from having the partners they associate (with Him).**" [al-Tawbah: 31]

This is in addition to other Ayahs (Qur'anic verses) that were revealed praising those who believed in Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and censuring those who disbelieved in him.

The Injil that Allah (Exalted be He) revealed to 'Isa (peace be upon him) was the Book that heralded the coming of the Message of Muhammad (peace be upon him). But despite this, the Christians do not believe in him. However, you use as evidence the Qur'an, which was revealed to him by Allah, and still believe the claims made by the Jews that they crucified 'Isa ibn Maryam and killed him. You claim that this was written in the Injil, but Allah declares you to be liars, as He did the Jews by saying in the Qur'an: "**And because of their saying (in boast), "We killed Messiah ‘Isâ (Jesus), son of Maryam (Mary), the Messenger of Allâh," - but they killed him not, nor crucified him, but it appeared so to them [the resemblance of ‘Isâ (Jesus) was put over another man (and they killed that man)]**" [al-Nisa: 157] 

You claim that 'Isa ibn Maryam is the son of Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He! High above having children) and He declares you to be Kafirs (disbelievers) when He says: "**Surely, in disbelief are they who say that Allâh is the Messiah, son of Maryam (Mary).**" [al-Maidah: 17]

You also claimed that he is a god with Allah, and so He declares you to be Kafirs when He says: "**Surely, disbelievers are those who said: "Allâh is the third of the three (in a Trinity)." But there is no Ilâh (god) (none who has the right to be worshipped) but One Ilâh (God -Allâh). And if they cease not from what they say, verily, a painful torment will befall on the disbelievers among them.**" [al-Maidah: 73]

You claimed that eating pork is Halal (lawful), and monasticism is a form of worship, although this was not mentioned in the Injil; this is a religion other than that which Allah revealed or declared lawful. After these claims and others that you fabricated, you claim that the Injil has not been distorted, that you have not hidden or added anything to it, and then you try to use the Qur'an to prove your claims and innovations. In doing so, you pay attention to the Mutashabihat (dependent Qur'anic verses, open to more than one interpretation or whose meaning is known only to Allah) and you avoid the Muhkamat (decisive legislative, independent Qur'anic verses, closed to interpretation), seeking to create confusion, twisting the words, and defaming the religion. Allah says: "**O people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians)! Now has come to you Our Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) explaining to you much of that which you used to hide from the Scripture and pass over (i.e. leaving out without explaining) much.**" [al-Maidah: 15]

Up to the last Ayah in which Allah says: "**O people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians)! Now has come to you Our Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) making (things) clear unto you, after a break in (the series of) Messengers, lest you say: 'There came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner.'**" [al-Maidah: 19]

Allah also says: "**O people of the Scripture (Christians)! Do not exceed the limits in your religion**"[al-Nisa: 171] up to His Saying: "**The Messiah will never be proud to reject to be a slave to Allâh**" [al-Nisa: 172]

If you do not do this, you will be among those about whom Allah says: "**Verily, those who disbelieve in Allâh and His Messengers and wish to make distinction between Allâh and His Messengers (by believing in Allâh and disbelieving in His Messengers) saying, "We believe in some but reject others," and wish to adopt a way in between. They are in truth disbelievers. And We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating torment.**" [al-Nisa: 150-151]

#### Answer to question: "**Allah says in the Qur'an that the Jews and the Christians read the Divine Books (Surah Al-Baqarah, 2:113)?**"

The question refers to the following Ayah (Qur'anic verse) in which Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**The Jews said that the Christians follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); and the Christians said that the Jews follow nothing (i.e. are not on the right religion); though they both recite the Scripture. Like unto their word, said (the pagans) who know not. Allâh will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection about that wherein they have been differing.**" [al-Baqarah: 113]

In this Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) reprimands the two groups, the Jews and the Christians, due to their stubborn and aggressive refusal to believe in the last Book that had been revealed. Allah reprimands the Jews for disbelieving in the Message conveyed by 'Isa (Jesus, peace be upon him) and the laws that he brought. They did that even though they recite their Scripture, the Tawrah (Torah), which also includes the covenant Allah took from them to believe in 'Isa and the laws that he would bring from Allah. Allah also reprimands the Christians for disbelieving in Musa (Moses, peace be upon him), even though they recite their Scripture, the Injil (Gospel), which confirmed the Tawrah that was revealed to Musa, except for few matters that Allah ordered `Isa to make lawful for them.

However, this does not mean acknowledging the distortions made to the Tawrah and the Injil or the texts hidden by the Jews and the Christians from the Books that were revealed to their prophets. This is supported by the fact that Allah mentions in other Ayahs the corruption that each did to the texts of the Scriptures revealed to their prophets, while arguing to prove their false claims using Mutashabihat (dependent Qur'anic verses, open to more than one interpretation or whose meaning is known only to Allah) to cause confusion and misinterpretation. All that they took out of their Books, distorted, and concealed should be brought together, added to that the fact that they believed in a part of the Scripture and rejected the rest. Both Books, the Tawrah and the Injil, were revealed by Allah, as was the Qur'an, and each of them confirmed the others. All prophets heralded the coming of those next and they all believed in each other. It is therefore obligatory to believe in all the prophets and in all that was revealed to them by Allah (Exalted be He).

Anyone who believes in some of them and disbelieves in others is a disbeliever in all of them. This is supported by the following Ayahs: "**Verily, those who disbelieve in Allâh and His Messengers and wish to make distinction between Allâh and His Messengers (by believing in Allâh and disbelieving in His Messengers) saying, "We believe in some but reject others," and wish to adopt a way in between. They are in truth disbelievers. And We have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating torment. And those who believe in Allâh and His Messengers and make no distinction between any of them (Messengers), We shall give them their rewards; and Allâh is Ever Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.**" [al-Nisa: 150-152] These Ayahs are general and apply to the Jews, the Christians, and others.

Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**O people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians)! Now has come to you Our Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) explaining to you much of that which you used to hide from the Scripture and pass over (i.e. leaving out without explaining) much. Indeed, there has come to you from Allâh a light (Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) and a plain Book (this Qur’ân). Wherewith Allâh guides all those who seek His Good Pleasure to ways of peace, and He brings them out of darkness by His Will unto light and guides them to the Straight Way (Islâmic Monotheism).**" [al-maidah: 15-16], and "**And (remember) when Mûsâ (Moses) said to his people**" [al-Maidah: 20] These Ayahs are also general and refer to the Jews and the Christians. 

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Fight against those who (1) believe not in Allâh, (2) nor in the Last Day, (3) nor forbid that which has been forbidden by Allâh and His Messenger Muhammad (صلى الله عليه وسلم) (4) and those who acknowledge not the religion of truth (i.e. Islâm) among the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), until they pay the Jizyah with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued.**" [al-Tawbah: 29], "**O you who believe! Verily, there are many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the (Christian) monks**" [al-Tawbah: 34] These Ayahs once again are general and apply to the Jews and the Christians also.

Allah (Exalted be He) again says: "**Do you (faithful believers) covet that they will believe in your religion inspite of the fact that a party of them (Jewish rabbis) used to hear the Word of Allâh [the Taurât (Torah)], then they used to change it knowingly after they understood it?**" [al-Baqarah: 75] These Ayahs and many others, before and after them, expose the scandals that were committed by the Jews.

Allah (Exalted be He) also says about them: "**They (the Jews, Quraish pagans, idolaters) did not estimate Allâh with an estimation due to Him when they said: "Nothing did Allâh send down to any human being (by revelation)." Say (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم): "Who then sent down the Book which Mûsâ (Moses) brought, a light and a guidance to mankind which you (the Jews) have made into (separate) papersheets, disclosing (some of it) and concealing much.**" [al-An'am: 91] There are other Ayahs with similar meanings that were revealed about the Christians that show, for example, that they concealed the news heralding the Message of Muhammad (peace be upon him). 

Allah (Exalted be He) says in His Repudiation of the Christians: "**Surely, in disbelief are they who say that Allâh is the Messiah, son of Maryam (Mary).**" [al-Maidah: 17] Up to His Saying: "**Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed**" [al-maidah: 78]

And Allah (Exalted be He) says about the Jews and the Christians: "**And the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) differed not until after there came to them clear evidence (i.e. Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم and whatever was revealed to him).**" [al-Bayyinah: 4] Up to His Saying: "**Verily, those who disbelieve**" [al-Bayyinah: 6]

After clarifying this matter, it is not permissible to claim that the Qur'an praises the Jews or the Christians who have not believed in it after its revelation. Similarly, we cannot claim that the Qur'an praises the distorted Tawrah or the distorted Injil. The distortions made to them are many, e.g. 'Isa as a son of and a god with Allah, the false claim of `Isa's crucifixion or his murder by the Jews, and their concealment of the Prophethood and Mission of Muhammad. If these examples do not indicate distortion, concealment, interpolation, or omissions that have been made to their texts, what else can we call what those two groups did to the Books revealed to their prophets?

#### Answer to question: "**It is mentioned in the Qur'an that the Christians should be judged according to the Injil (Gospel), Surah Al-Ma'idah 5: 47?**"

The questioner here refers to the Ayah saying: "**Let the people of the Injeel (Gospel) judge by what Allâh has revealed therein. And whosoever does not judge by what Allâh has revealed (then) such (people) are the Fâsiqûn [the rebellious i.e. disobedient (of a lesser degree)] to Allâh.**" [al-Maidah: 47] This Ayah does not establish evidence for the claims of the Christians, because the book meant here is the Injil that was revealed by Allah to 'Isa (Jesus, peace be upon him) the son of Maryam (Mary, peace be upon her), not the tampered one that mentions that 'Isa is the son of Allah, a god, crucified before his ascension to heaven, nor mentions glad tidings of the advent of Muhammad (peace be upon him) as a Messenger of Allah. 

Considering this Ayah: "**And We have sent down to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) the Book (this Qur’ân) in truth, confirming the Scripture that came before it and Muhaymin (trustworthy in highness and a witness) over it (old Scriptures)**" [al-Maidah: 48], this indicates that the Scriptures of Ibrahim (Abraham) and Musa (Moses), the Zabur (Book revealed to Prophet Dawud [David]), and the Injil and the Tawrah (Torah) should not be used in adjudication except for what has been authenticated, not abrogated by the Qur'an, for Allah's saying (may be He Exalted) in this Ayah: "**...confirming the Scripture that came before it and Muhaymin (trustworthy in highness and a witness) over it (old Scriptures).**" [al-Maidah:48]

It has also been proven in parts (1 and 4) that both the Jews and the Christians have tampered with the books of their prophets. So we should, to understand the Ayahs, examine them together not individually, so that the meaning may be properly interpreted. However, those who seek deviation and deception whose hearts have been given to error, who are occupied with debate and dispute, do not take the context of these Ayahs into account or understand them separately, because "**They (the disbelievers, the Jews and the Christians) want to extinguish Allâh’s Light (with which Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم has been sent - Islâmic Monotheism) with their mouths, but Allâh will not allow except that His Light should be perfected even though the Kâfirûn (disbelievers) hate (it).**" [al-Tawbah: 32]

#### Answer to question: "**The Qur'an informs us that had Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) had any doubts regarding the Qur'an, then he was to consult the People of the Scripture among the Jews and the Christians as stated in Surah Yunus (10/94).**"

The questioner refers to Allah's Statement: "**So if you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) are in doubt concerning that which We have revealed unto you, [i.e. that your name is written in the Taurât (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel)], then ask those who are reading the Book [the Taurât (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel)] before you.**" [Yunus: 94] The Ayah lends them no support, for the conditional sentence does not necessitate the true existence of the condition. Thus, the result clause may be conditional upon an impossible condition, for example Allah stated: "**And that was Our Proof which We gave Ibrâhîm (Abraham) against his people. We raise whom We will in degrees. Certainly your Lord is All-Wise, All-Knowing.**" [al-An'am: 83] Up to His Statement: "**This is the Guidance of Allâh with which He guides whomsoever He wills of His slaves. But if they had joined in worship others with Allâh, all that they used to do would have been of no benefit to them.**" [al-An'am: 88] Thus, Allah informs us that had the prophets associated others in worship with Allah (an impossible condition), all their good deeds would have been rendered void. Indeed, they all died as Muslims, and were all infallible. 

It is due to their infallibility that Allah stated: "**And indeed it has been revealed to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), as it was to those (Allâh’s Messengers) before you: "If you join others in worship with Allâh, (then) surely (all) your deeds will be in vain, and you will certainly be among the losers. Nay! But worship Allâh (Alone and none else), and be among the grateful.**" [al-Zumar: 65-66]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) never had any doubt, or asked any of the People of the Scripture, for he understood that the underlying message revealed does not require the question to eliminate any doubts, but to confirm that if the disbelievers turned deaf to your call, the people of the Scripture should have evidence in support of your mission, as Allah stated: "**Say: “Sufficient as a witness between me and you is Allâh, and those too who have knowledge of the Scripture (such as ‘Abdullâh bin Salâm and other Jews and Christians who embraced Islâm).”**" [al-Ra'ad: 43]

Allah also stated: "**Say: "Tell me! If this (Qur’ân) is from Allâh and you deny it, and a witness from among the Children of Israel (‘Abdullâh bin Salâm رضي الله عنه) testifies that [this Qur’ân is from Allâh (like the Taurât (Torah)], and he believed (embraced Islâm) while you are too proud (to believe)." Verily, Allâh guides not the people who are Zâlimûn (polytheists, disbelievers and wrong-doers).**" [al-Ahqaf: 10]

Also Allah stated: "**Is it not a sign to them that the learned scholars (like ‘Abdullâh bin Salâm رضي الله عنه who embraced Islâm) of the Children of Israel knew it (as true)?**" [al-Shu'ara: 197]

Indeed, there are so many Ayahs indicating the textual evidence with the People of the Scripture in support of the Mission of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) against the obstinate disbelievers who rejected the call to the Oneness of Allah, and the fact that all Messengers sent to humans were humans, for this is Allah's Wise Way as stated in the opening of Surah Yunus: "**Is it a wonder for mankind that We have sent Our Revelation to a man from among themselves (i.e. Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) (saying): "Warn mankind (of the coming torment in Hell), and give good news to those who believe (in the Oneness of Allâh and in His Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) that they shall have with their Lord the rewards of their good deeds?**" [Yunus: 2]

Understanding the above exegesis of the relevant Ayahs juxtaposed to other similar Ayahs giving details and decisive explanation to each other will specify the meaning of the Mutashabihat (similar and dependent Qur'anic verses, open to more than one interpretation or whose meaning is known only to Allah). Understanding these Ayahs provides the answer to the doubts posed by the Christian American missionary. It contains a full response to the suspicions and doubts he raised in the beginning of his speech.

May Allah grant us success. May peace and blessings be upon our Prophet Muhammad, his family, and Companions.



