---
layout: post
title: A man taking his family to the valley despite being told there is a flood and they all died as a result
hijri: Muharram 20, 1442 AH
category: [kafarah]
shaykhs:
 - Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
 - Shaykh Abdul-Razzaq al-Afify
 - Shaykh Abdullah ibn Ghudayyan
---

Question: 

On 7/12/1408 A.H., I was returning from Jizan to Fifa Mountains where my family lives, heading to my mother's house where my children were staying. I wanted to take my children with me to Jizan, but my mother opposed me and told me that the 'Eid (Feast) is approaching, and she wanted me and my children to spend the 'Eid with her, but I refused. She remained silent for a while, and then she said, "May Allah do what is best." I did not pay attention to those words. I took my wife and children, and we rode a small car. When I reached the foot of the mountain, they told me at the police station that there are floods in the valley, and they recommended that I should wait until the floods subside. However, I did not listen to them, and I continued my journey, thinking that there was no flood. 

When I reached the valley, the car was stuck, and the people kept on asking me to run away, as the flood is coming. My wife also tried to help me run away, and I kept on trying to get out of the car for fifteen minutes. However, the flood came, and I could not get all of my family out of the car. My wife and six of my children died in this tragic event. Please advise concerning what I should do in this case. May Allah reward you.

Answer: 

You should make seven Kaffarahs (expiations), as you caused the death of the seven people who were with you in the car. Kaffarah for each one is emancipating a believing slave. If you cannot do so, you have to observe Sawm (fasting) for two consecutive months. Allah (Exalted be He) says, "**It is not for a believer to kill a believer except (that it be) by mistake; and whosoever kills a believer by mistake, (it is ordained that) he must set free a believing slave and a compensation (blood-money, i.e. Diya) be given to the deceased’s family, unless they remit it. Until He says, And whoso finds this (the penance of freeing a slave) beyond his means, he must fast for two consecutive months in order to seek repentance from Allâh. And Allâh is Ever All-Knowing, All-Wise.**" [al-Nisa: 92-93]

You should also perform Tawbah (repentance to Allah), as you were careless, and you did not obey your mother or the people who advised you to run away. You should not do this again.

May Allah grant us success. May peace and blessings be upon our Prophet Muhammad, his family, and Companions.
