---
layout: blog
publisher: alsalafiyyah@icloud.com
title: "It is Compulsory to save yourself and family from Hellfire"
hijri: Rabi' Al-Awwal 8, 1442 AH
lang: en
source: "A speech delivered by His Eminence at Al-Ifta' mosque in Riyadh on Wednesday 6/6/1415 A.H."
excerpt: "The greatest responsibility is to take care of what saves them from the Punishment of Allah, by advising them to fear Allah and abide by His Orders and warning them against the Prohibitions of Allah. One should continue doing this until he meets his Lord."
active: muqolat
muftis:
  shaykh: 
    - name: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
      url: /biography/binbaz/
---

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Allah's Peace and Blessings be upon the Messenger of Allah.

In the Ever-Glorious Qur'an, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "O you who believe! Ward off yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones, over which are (appointed) angels stern (and) severe, who disobey not, (from executing) the Commands they receive from Allâh, but do that which they are commanded." [Al-Tahrim: 6] 

Allah (Glorified be He) orders His believing servants to protect themselves and their families from the Punishment of Allah, through Taqwa (fear/wariness of offending Allah) and ordering their families to do so.

Protection from Hellfire is through Taqwa and sticking to the Din (religion) of Islam. Besides, one should advise his family, including parents, children, brothers and sisters, to fear Allah and stick to His Din, through recommending each other to follow Al-Haqq (the Truth), cooperate in righteousness and Taqwa, enjoining Ma`ruf (that which is judged as good, beneficial, or fitting by Islamic law and Muslims of sound intellect) and forbidding Munkar (that which is unacceptable or disapproved of by Islamic law and Muslims of sound intellect). Such should be the state of the Mu'min (believer) with his family and Muslim brethren; by calling to Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He), he seeks to save himself and others from the Punishment of Allah. This matter needs patience, sincerity to Allah, truthfulness, and persistence. The most deserving of your good companionship and kindness is your family and relatives. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "All of you are guardians and are responsible for your charges; the Imam (i.e. ruler) is a guardian and is responsible of his charges and the man is a guardian and is responsible of his family." [^1] 

The greatest responsibility is to take care of what saves them from the Punishment of Allah, by advising them to fear Allah and abide by His Orders and warning them against the Prohibitions of Allah. One should continue doing this until he meets his Lord. Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "Worship Allâh and join none with Him (in worship)" [Al-Nisa: 36] Then He (Glorified be He) says: "...and do good to parents, kinsfolk, orphans, Al-Masâkîn (the poor)" [Al-Nisa: 36] Having commanded His Right i.e. Worshipping Him Alone sincerely and abandoning Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship), Allah (Glorified be He) orders people to do good to parents, relatives and family. Every Muslim should pay attention to this matter and be keen for it to be a means to their salvation on the Day of Resurrection due to his advice, care, enjoining Ma`ruf and forbidding Munkar. A Muslim should do the same with his Muslim brethren; he has to be a guide to goodness, hoping for the reward of Allah and fearing His Punishment. Allah (Glorified be He) says: "The believers, men and women, are Auliyâ’ (helpers, supporters, friends, protectors) of one another; they enjoin (on the people) Al-Ma‘rûf (i.e. Islâmic Monotheism and all that Islâm orders one to do), and forbid (people) from Al-Munkar (i.e. polytheism and disbelief of all kinds, and all that Islâm has forbidden)" [Al-Tawbah: 71]

Accordingly, among themselves and within their families, the believers should observe obligations with regard to both their families and Muslim brethren, hoping for reward from Allah and fearing His Punishment. Allah (Glorified be He) says to His Prophet (peace be upon him): "And enjoin As-Salât (the prayer) on your family, and be patient in offering them [i.e. the Salât (prayers)]." [TaHa: 132] 

Allah (Glorified be He) states that His Prophet and Messenger Isma'il (Ishmael peace be upon him) was true to his promise, and he was a messenger and a prophet. He used to enjoin on his people Salah (Prayer) and Zakah (obligatory charity) and was to his Lord pleasing. In Surah (Qur'anic chapter) Maryam, Allah (Exalted be He) says: "And mention in the Book (the Qur’ân) Ismâ‘îl (Ishmael). Verily he was true to what he promised, and he was a Messenger, (and) a Prophet. And he used to enjoin on his family and his people As-Salât (the prayers) and the Zakât and his Lord was pleased with him." [Maryam: 54-55]

Your family, children and relatives are the most deserving of your kindness, piety and pursuit of saving them from Hellfire; this is the greatest kind of goodness. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "O you who believe! Ward off yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell)" [Al-Tahrim: 6] This great deed is more important than giving them money and worldly needs; seeking to save them from the Punishment and Dissatisfaction of Allah on the Day of Resurrection is a great matter. Being kind to relatives by giving them charity is among the good deeds one is obliged to do; but most importantly, you have to advise them to obey Allah, abide by His Obligations and quit His Prohibitions according to your ability. You have to continue doing so and set a good example with regard to every good. You have to start with yourself, so that others might imitate you; you have to hasten to offer Salah and continue offering it in congregation. You have to hold your tongue, be generous to relatives and neighbors, enjoin Ma'ruf, forbid Munkar, call to Allah, and undertake other charitable ways. You have to set a good example for your family, companions, colleagues and neighbors. 

This needs patience, sincerity to Allah and truthfulness, for this is a great matter. It is a subject of Da`wah (calling to Islam), guidance, advice seeking to save yourself and your family from Hellfire, acting upon the Saying of Allah (Glorified be He): "O you who believe! Ward off yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones" [Al-Tahrim: 6] Allah (Glorified be He) describes them as those who believe, since Iman (Faith/belief) ordains that matter and calls upon them to do so, though the order is obligatory upon all.

It is obligatory upon each Mukallaf (person meeting the conditions to be held legally accountable for their actions) to fear Allah sincerely and strive to rescue himself, family and all people from the Punishment of Allah. However, this is more obligatory upon the believers, since they believe in Allah and know what they should do, so the obligation upon them is greater. Addressing them, Allah (Glorified be He) says: "O you who believe! Ward off yourselves and your families against a Fire (Hell) whose fuel is men and stones" [Al-tahrim: 6] Beware of being the fuel of Hellfire. Then Allah (Glorified be He) says: "...over which are (appointed) angels stern (and) severe, who disobey not, (from executing) the Commands they receive from Allâh, but do that which they are commanded." [Al-Tahrim: 6] i.e. they carry out orders, unlike the people of this world who may betray and bribe. In contrast, the angels can not disobey; rather, they carry out orders by admitting you and others into Hellfire. 

Therefore, beware of meeting your Lord in a case that displeases Allah and makes you enter Hellfire. You should pay due attention to this matter, with truthfulness and sincerity along with asking Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) to grant you support and success. You have to set a good example to your family, so when they see you hurrying and racing toward doing good deeds, they would imitate your good deeds. They should also see you keeping away from misdeeds, in order to imitate you and quit evil deeds. This worldly life is an abode of strife, patience, cooperation on righteousness and piety and recommending Al-Haqq but the Hereafter is the abode of reward for your good and evil deeds. 

The worldly life is the abode of work and preparation. Accordingly, Allah (Glorified be He) says: "By Al-‘Asr (the time). Verily, man is in loss, Except those who believe (in Islâmic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, and recommend one another to the truth [i.e. order one another to perform all kinds of good deeds (Al-Ma‘ruf) which Allâh has ordained, and abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds (Al-Munkar which Allâh has forbidden], and recommend one another to patience (for the sufferings, harms, and injuries which one may encounter in Allâh’s Cause during preaching His religion of Islâmic Monotheism or Jihâd)." [Al-Asr: 1-3] 

Allah (Glorified be He) says: "Help you one another in Al-Birr and At-Taqwâ (virtue, righteousness and piety); but do not help one another in sin and transgression." [Al-Ma'idah: 2]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "Religion is based on advising one another. Upon this it was said: For whom, Messenger of Allah? He replied: For Allah, His Book, His Messenger and for the leaders and the general Muslims." [^2]

It is necessary to recommend one another to Al-Haqq and exchange advice sincerely and patiently until you meet your Lord, looking for His Reward. Therefore, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "As for those who strive hard in Us (Our Cause), We will surely guide them to Our Paths (i.e. Allâh’s religion - Islâmic Monotheism). And verily, Allâh is with the Muhsinûn (good doers)." [Al-Ankabut: 69]

The true Mujahid (one striving/fighting in the Cause of Allah) will be guided and supported by Allah. He (Glorified be He) says: "As for those who strive hard in Us (Our Cause)" [Al-Ankabut: 69] It means those who strive against themselves, the enemies of Allah, Satan and desires; therefore, Allah (Glorified be He) generalized the word Jihad (fighting/striving in the Cause of Allah) in the Ayah (Qur'anic verse) mentioned above to include all kinds of Jihad. He (Glorified be He) says: "As for those who strive hard in Us (Our Cause)" [Al-Ankabut: 69] meaning in the Cause of Allah, "We will surely guide them to Our Paths (i.e. Allâh’s Religion — Islâmic Monotheism). And verily, Allâh is with the Muhsinûn (good doers)." [Al-Ankabut: 69]

Accordingly, you should strive to obey your Lord and strive against yourself to be upright and strive with those who are under your charge until they become upright. Allah is with you. "As for those who strive hard in Us (Our Cause), We will surely guide them to Our Paths (i.e. Allâh’s religion - Islâmic Monotheism). And verily, Allâh is with the Muhsinûn (good doers)." [Al-Ankabut: 69]

I ask Allah to help us and all Muslims be among the Mujahids in His Cause and among the callers to guidance and supporters of Al-Haqq. I ask Allah to grant us success to hasten to do good deeds and avoid evil deeds. He is All-Hearer, Ever Near. May Allah's Peace and Blessings be upon our Prophet Muhammad, his family, and Companions!

---

[^1]: Narrated by Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Friday, no. 844; and Muslim, Sahih, Book on rulership, no. 3408.
[^2]: Narrated by Al-Tirmidhi, Book on righteousness and upholding ties of kinship, no. 1849; and Al-Nasa*y, Book on Al-Bay`ah, no. 4128.
