---
layout: blog
publisher: alsalafiyyah@icloud.com
title: "The obligation of abiding by the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger and warning against whatever contradicts them"
hijri: Safar 19, 1442 AH
lang: en
uid: the-obligation-to-abid-themselves-by-quran-and-sunnah
excerpt: "Allah (Exalted be He) has pointed out that the straight path is belief in the guidance and the religion of truth with which He sent His Prophet (peace be upon him) and to act according to them. Whoever follows this straight path and is steadfast in it, will attain Paradise and honor. Whoever deviates from it and follows his whims, will incur loss and evil destiny. Allah (Exalted be He) commands all His slaves to follow the straight path and prohibits them to follow other paths, which lead them to the path of Hellfire."
muftis:
  shaykh: 
    - name: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
      url: /biography/binbaz/
---

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. The best outcome is for the righteous. May peace and blessings be upon the slave and Messenger of Allah, whom He entrusted with His Revelation and chose from among His creation, our Prophet, Imam and master Muhammad, son of 'Abdullah, and upon his family, his Companions and those follow his way and adopt his guidance until the Day of Judgment. To proceed:

Indeed, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) sent His Prophet (peace be upon him) with guidance and the religion of truth. Allah (Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-Tawbah and Surah Al-Saff: "**It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islâm), to make it superior over all religions even though the Mushrikûn (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allâh) hate (it).**" [Al-Tawbah: 33]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Fath: "**He it is Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islâm), that He may make it (Islâm) superior to all religions. And All-Sufficient is Allâh as a Witness.**" [Al-Fath: 28]

Scholars of Tafsir (exegesis of the meanings of the Qur'an), may Allah bestow His mercy upon them, said: Guidance is that with which Allah (Exalted be He) sent His Prophet (peace be upon him) comprising useful knowledge and truthful information. Whereas, the religion of truth is that with which Allah sent him (peace be upon him) comprising righteous deeds and just rulings.

Allah (Exalted be He) has pointed out that the straight path is belief in the guidance and the religion of truth with which He sent His Prophet (peace be upon him) and to act according to them. Whoever follows this straight path and is steadfast in it, will attain Paradise and honor. Whoever deviates from it and follows his whims, will incur loss and evil destiny. Allah (Exalted be He) commands all His slaves to follow the straight path and prohibits them to follow other paths, which lead them to the path of Hellfire. Therefore, He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-An'am: "**And verily, this (i.e. Allâh’s Commandments mentioned in the above two Verses 151 and 152) is My Straight Path, so follow it, and follow not (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His Path. This He has ordained for you that you may become Al-Muttaqûn (the pious - see V.2:2).**" [Al-An'am: 153] His saying: "**And verily, this**" refers to the injunctions that He previously commanded His Prophet (peace be upon him) to recite to people and explain to them in order to understand and heed them. This is clear in His Words (Exalted be He): "**Say (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم): "Come, I will recite what your Lord has prohibited you from: Join not anything in worship with Him; be good and dutiful to your parents; kill not your children because of poverty - We provide sustenance for you and for them; come not near to Al-Fawâhish (shameful sins, illegal sexual intercourse) whether committed openly or secretly; and kill not anyone whom Allâh has forbidden, except for a just cause (according to Islâmic law). This He has commanded you that you may understand." "And come not near to the orphan’s property, except to improve it, until he (or she) attains the age of full strength; and give full measure and full weight with justice. We burden not any person, but that which he can bear. And whenever you give your word (i.e. judge between men or give evidence), say the truth even if a near relative is concerned, and fulfil the Covenant of Allâh. This He commands you, that you may remember.**" [Al-An'am: 151-152]

Then, He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**And verily, this (i.e. Allâh’s Commandments mentioned in the above two Verses 151 and 152) is My Straight Path, so follow it**" [Al-An'am: 153] In these Ayahs (Qur'anic verses), Allah (Exalted be He) has explained that following these orders and staying away from His Prohibitions is the straight path, which He commands to be followed. It is noted that Allah (Exalted be He) started these Ayahs by warning against Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship) and explaining that it is prohibited for the Muslim Ummah (nation based on one creed) because it is the most heinous sin and the gravest crime. That is also because it opposes Tawhid (belief in the Oneness of Allah/ monotheism), which is the greatest obligation, the most important duty, the foundation of religion and the basis of the straight path. It is that with which Allah (Exalted be He) sent all the Messengers, and because of which He revealed all the Books. It is that for which Jinn and mankind were created. He (Exalted be He) says: "**And I (Allâh) created not the jinn and mankind except that they should worship Me (Alone).**" Al-Dhariyat: 56]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**And verily, We have sent among every Ummah (community, nation) a Messenger (proclaiming): “Worship Allâh (Alone), and avoid (or keep away from) Tâghût (all false deities i.e. do not worship Tâghût besides Allâh).”**" [Al-Nahl: 36]

In another Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And We did not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) but We revealed to him (saying): Lâ ilâha illa Ana [none has the right to be worshipped but I (Allâh)], so worship Me (Alone and none else).**" [Al-Anbiya: 25] Allah reiterates this commandment several times in His Book and in the words of His Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him). Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**O mankind! Worship your Lord (Allâh), Who created you and those who were before you so that you may become Al-Muttaqûn (the pious - See V.2:2).**" [Al-Baqarah: 21]

He (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: "**And your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him.**" [Al-Isra: 23]

In another Ayah, He (Exalted be He) says: "**And they were commanded not, but that they should worship Allâh, and worship none but Him Alone (abstaining from ascribing partners to Him)**" [Al-Bayyinah: 5] Allah (Exalted be He) guides His slaves in Surah Al-Fatihah to acknowledge this truth, saying: "**All the praises and thanks be to Allâh, the Lord of the ‘Alamîn (mankind, jinn and all that exists). The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. The Only Owner (and the Only Ruling Judge) of the Day of Recompense (i.e. the Day of Resurrection) You (Alone) we worship, and You (Alone) we ask for help (for each and everything).**" [Al-Fatihah: 1-5] There are many Ayahs in this regard.

It is reported in the Two Sahih (authentic) Books of Hadith (i.e. Al-Bukhari and Muslim) from Ibn 'Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him and his father) "**That the Prophet (peace be upon him) said to Mu'adh, 'Do you know what is the right of Allah upon His slaves? And what is the right of the slaves upon Allah (Exalted be He)?' Mu'adh said, 'Allah and His Messenger know best.' He (peace be upon him) said, 'The Right of Allah upon His slaves is that they should worship Him and should not associate any partner with Him...'**" [^1]

He (peace be upon him) also said: "**Whoever dies while still invoking a rival (in worship) to Allah, will enter the Fire (Hell).**"(Related by Al-Bukhari in his Sahih)[^2]

There are many other Hadiths reported in this regard. This is the meaning of the testimony there is no god but Allah. It means that no one is truly worthy of worship except Allah (Exalted be He). Thus, it negates all types of worshipping other than Allah (Exalted be He) and confirms that all forms of worship in truth must be devoted to Allah Alone. He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**That is because Allâh, He is the Truth, and that which they invoke besides Him is Al-Bâtil (falsehood, Satan and all other false deities)**" [Luqman: 30]

Allah (Exalted be He) then mentions the right of parents, which is to treat them kindly and never to show impiety to them. He (Exalted be He) also prohibited killing children for fear of poverty. He (Exalted be He) informed us that He is the Provider for parents and children. 

It was the habit of some people during Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic time of ignorance) to kill their children for fear of poverty. Thus, Allah (Exalted be He) prohibited His slaves from doing this crime, because it constitutes injustice, transgression, and thinking ill of Allah (Exalted be He). Then He (Exalted be He) prohibited approaching indecency, whether apparent or hidden; namely, all types of sins. He (Exalted be He) put special emphasis on the crime of killing someone without right due to the grievousness of this crime and the evil consequences that result from it that exceeds all other sin, except Shirk. Afterwards, He (Exalted be He) prohibited approaching the property of an orphan except in the way that is best; that is when the orphan reaches maturity, comes of age, and starts understanding life. 

Moreover, Allah (Exalted be He) commanded giving full measure with fairness and justice because being dishonest with measure and weighing is injustice and transgression. It amounts to devouring property unjustly. Then He (Exalted be He) commanded fairness in speech after He commanded justice in action. He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**And whenever you give your word (i.e. judge between men or give evidence), say the truth even if a near relative is concerned**" [Al-An'am: 152] The meaning is that justice should be practiced in all words and actions with relatives and strangers, and people we like and dislike, out of obedience to Allah (Exalted be He) and implementing His Law. The opposite of justice is injustice in words and actions. Then He (Exalted be He) commanded His slaves to fulfill His covenant which He has taken from them, as mentioned in His manifest Book and from His trustworthy Messenger (peace be upon him). This covenant comprises all that Allah (Exalted be He) has legislated for His slaves, such as obligations, rulings, words, actions, prohibitions, as stated by the eminent Mufassirs (exegetes of the Qur'an). Afterwards, He (Exalted and Glorified be He) says: "**And verily, this (i.e. Allâh’s Commandments mentioned in the above two Verses 151 and 152) is My Straight Path**" [Al-An'am: 153], so follow it, and follow not (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His Path. It becomes clear that the Path of Allah is acting in accordance with His Commands, keeping away from His Prohibitions and believing inwardly and outwardly in all that His Messenger (peace be upon him) brought of useful knowledge, true information, legislation and rulings, as opposed to the hypocrites.

In Surah Al-Fatihah, Allah (Exalted be He) has guided His slaves to ask Him to guide them to His Path because of their great need for it. He (Exalted be He) explained that this path is the one of those upon whom Allah (Exalted be He) bestowed His Favors; those mentioned in His Words (Exalted be He): "**And whoso obey Allâh and the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), then they will be in the company of those on whom Allâh has bestowed His Grace, of the Prophets, the Siddiqûn (those followers of the Prophets who were first and foremost to believe in them, like Abu Bakr As-Siddîq (رضي الله عنه), the martyrs, and the righteous. And how excellent these companions are!**" [Al-Nisa: 69]

The Hadiths ranked as Marfu' (a Hadith narrated from the Prophet with a connected or disconnected chain of narration), the narrations of the Sahabah (Companions of the Prophet) and the Tabi'un (Followers, the generation after the Companions of the Prophet) proved that the path which is prohibited to be followed is that of Bid'ahs (innovations in the religion), doubtful matters, prohibited desires, erroneous doctrines and creeds, and false religions. For example, it is reported by Imam Ahmad and Al-Nasa'y through good Isnad (chain of narrators), on the authority of 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud (may Allah be pleased with him), that he said: "**The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) drew a line with his hand and then said, 'This is the Path of Allah; it is straight.' Then he (peace be upon him) drew other lines on its right and left side and then said, 'These are the other paths. All these paths have a devil on it inviting people to it.' Then he (peace be upon him) recited, "And verily, this (i.e. Allâh’s Commandments mentioned in the above two Verses 151 and 152) is My Straight Path, so follow it, and follow not (other) paths, for they will separate you away from His Path." [Al-An'am: 153]**" [^3]

People should be aware that Allah (Exalted be He) concluded the first of the three Ayahs mentioned above with His Words: This He has commanded you that you may understand." [Al-An'am: 151] Also, He (Exalted be He) concluded the second Ayah with His Words: "**This He commands you, that you may remember.**" [Al-An'am: 152] And, at the end of the third Ayah, He (Exalted be He) says: "**This He has ordained for you that you may become Al-Muttaqûn (the pious)**" [Al-An'am: 153] Some scholars of Tafsir said that the wisdom behind this - and Allah knows best - is that whoever contemplates the Book of Allah (Exalted be He) and frequently reads it, will have a sound understanding of the commands and prohibitions, and will be mindful of their great benefit and good outcomes in the life of this world and the Hereafter. Thus, piety is achieved by abiding by the Commands of Allah and avoiding His Prohibitions out of fearing His Wrath and Punishment, and hoping for His Forgiveness, Mercy, and Bounty. This is a great meaning. 

It is one of the secrets of the Book of Allah, which falsehood cannot approach from any direction. It is sent down by the All-Wise and Worthy of all praise, from Whom nothing is hidden, and for whom nothing is difficult. He is All-Aware of everything about His slaves and knows what is best for them. None is worthy of worship except Him and there is no Lord other than Him. He (Exalted be He) stated that what He sent down to His Prophet (peace be upon him) is a revelation by the means of which good life will be attained, and a light through which insight and guidance will be obtained. He (Exalted be He) also informed us that His Messenger (peace be upon him) is a guide to the straight path, which He (Exalted be He) explained in the three Ayahs mentioned above, as stated in His Words in Surah Al-Shura: "**And thus We have sent to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم) Ruh (a Revelation, and a Mercy) of Our Command. You knew not what is the Book, nor what is Faith? But We have made it (this Qur’ân) a light wherewith We guide whosoever of Our slaves We will. And verily, you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم) are indeed guiding (mankind) to the Straight Path (i.e. Allâh’s Religion of Islâmic Monotheism). The Path of Allâh to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Verily, all matters at the end go to Allâh (for decision).**" [Al-Shura: 52-53]

In this Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) explains that the revelations that He sent down to His Prophet (peace be upon him), which are the Qur'an and the Sunnah, are mercy by means of which a good, happy and blessed life will be achieved, and a light through which guidance and insight will be obtained, as He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-An'am: "**Is he who was dead (without Faith by ignorance and disbelief) and We gave him life (by knowledge and Faith) and set for him a light (of Belief) whereby he can walk amongst men - like him who is in the darkness (of disbelief, polytheism and hypocrisy) from which he can never come out?**" [Al-An'am: 122]

In this Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) stated that the Kafir (disbeliever) is a dead person sinking in darkness, from which he will never come out unless Allah (Exalted be He) revives him with Islam and useful knowledge. He (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Anfal: "**O you who believe! Answer Allâh (by obeying Him) and (His) Messenger when he (صلى الله عليه وسلم) calls you to that which will give you life.**" [Al-Anfal: 24] Thus, He (Glorified and Exalted be He) stated that responding to Allah (Exalted be He) and the Messenger (peace be upon him) is the life, and that whoever does not respond to Allah (Exalted be He) and to the Messenger (peace be upon him) is counted among the dead.

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Nahl: "**Whoever works righteousness - whether male or female - while he (or she) is a true believer (of Islâmic Monotheism) verily, to him We will give a good life (in this world with respect, contentment and lawful provision), and We shall pay them certainly a reward in proportion to the best of what they used to do (i.e. Paradise in the Hereafter).**" [Al-Nahl: 97] In this noble Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) shows that whoever acts righteously, whether a male or female, and believes in Him (Exalted be He) and in His Messenger (peace be upon him), Allah (Exalted be He) will give them a good life. It is the life in which there is comfort of the heart and conscience along with present and future happiness because of the upright conformity with the legislation of the Lord (Exalted and Glorified be He) and continuous adherence to that until they meet Him (Exalted be He). Then Allah (Exalted be He) stated that He will reward them in the Hereafter with the best reward for what they used to do. 

It is noted that Allah (Exalted be He) combines the good life of this world and perfect happiness in the Hereafter. This is the Bounty of Allah (Exalted be He) which He gives to whom He wills. He is the Possessor of All Bounty. This great goodness will only be achieved when people hold fast to the Book of Allah (Exalted be He) and to the Sunnah of His Messenger (peace be upon him) in words, actions and beliefs, and continue so until they meet their Lord (Exalted be He), as He says in Surah Aal 'Imran: "**O you who believe! Fear Allâh (by doing all that He has ordered and by abstaining from all that He has forbidden) as He should be feared. [Obey Him, be thankful to Him, and remember Him always], and die not except in a state of Islâm [as Muslims (with complete submission to Allâh)]. And hold fast, all of you together, to the Rope of Allâh (i.e. this Qur’ân), and be not divided among yourselves**" [Aal Imran: 102-103] In these two Ayahs, Allah (Exalted be He) commands the people of faith to fear Him in all their affairs until they die on this principle. He also commands them to hold fast to His Rope, namely, the religion with which He sent His Prophet (peace be upon him), that is Islam, which is to hold fast to the Qur'an and the Sunnah, and prohibits dispute because of the loss of truth, the evil consequences and the disagreement of hearts that follow dispute.

He (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Hijr addressing His Prophet (peace be upon him): "**Therefore proclaim openly (Allâh’s Message - Islâmic Monotheism) that which you are commanded, and turn away from Al-Mushrikûn (polytheists, idolaters, and disbelievers - See V.2:105).**" [Al-Hijr: 94] Until His Words: "**So glorify the praises of your Lord and be of those who prostrate themselves (to Him). And worship your Lord until there comes unto you the certainty (i.e. death).**" [Al-Hijr: 98-99] It is clear that Allah (Exalted be He) commanded His Prophet (peace be upon him) to convey His Message, proclaim it openly, and turn away from those who oppose him. Then He commanded him to glorify His Praise, to be with those who prostrate themselves to Him (Glorified and Exalted be He) and to worship his Lord until death comes to him. It is thus evident that it is the duty of all slaves to be upright on the Legislation of Allah (Exalted be He), to hold fast to His Book and the Sunnah of His Prophet (peace be upon him), to abide by that way continuously, and not to pay attention to anyone who opposes it, until death comes.

In many Ayahs in His Glorious Book and in many authentic Hadiths reported from the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), Allah (Exalted be He) commanded that His Noble Book should be followed and that people should abide by it, follow the Sunnah, magnify it and beware of anything that disagrees with it. For example, Allah (Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-A'raf: "**Follow what has been sent down unto you from your Lord (the Qur’ân and Prophet Muhammad’s Sunnah), and follow not any Auliyâ’ (protectors and helpers who order you to associate partners in worship with Allâh), besides Him (Allâh). Little do you remember!**" [A-A'raf: 3] He (Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-An'am: "**And this is a blessed Book (the Qur’ân) which We have sent down, so follow it and fear Allâh (i.e. do not disobey His Orders), that you may receive mercy (i.e. be saved from the torment of Hell).**" [Al-An'am: 155] He (Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Isra': "**Verily, this Qur’ân guides to that which is most just and right and gives glad tidings to the believers (in the Oneness of Allâh and His Messenger, Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم), who work deeds of righteousness, that they shall have a great reward (Paradise).**" [Al-Isra: 9] He (Exalted be He) also says in Surah Sad: "**(This is) a Book (the Qur’ân) which We have sent down to you, full of blessings, that they may ponder over its Verses, and that men of understanding may remember.**" [Sad: 29]

There are many other Ayahs in this regard. After providing the details of the rulings of inheritance, Allah (Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-Nisa': "**These are the limits (set by) Allâh (or ordainments as regards laws of inheritance), and whosoever obeys Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) will be admitted to Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise), to abide therein, and that will be the great success. And whosoever disobeys Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), and transgresses His limits, He will cast him into the Fire, to abide therein; and he shall have a disgraceful torment.**" [Al-Nisa: 13-14] In the same Surah, Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**O you who believe! Obey Allâh and obey the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), and those of you (Muslims) who are in authority. (And) if you differ in anything amongst yourselves, refer it to Allâh and His Messenger (صلى الله عليه وسلم), if you believe in Allâh and in the Last Day. That is better and more suitable for final determination.**" [Al-Nisa: 59]

In this great Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) commands us to obey Him, His Messenger (peace be upon him), and those in authority. In the event of disagreement, He commanded that it should be resolved by reference to Him (Exalted be He) and to His Messenger (peace be upon him). The people of knowledge explained that referring an issue to Allah (Exalted be He) means to refer it to His Noble Book, whereas referring it to the Messenger (peace be upon him) means to refer it to him during his lifetime and to his Sunnah (peace be upon him) after his death. He (Exalted be He) said that this reference is better for people in their lifetime and in the Hereafter and gives best outcomes. Having said this, it is thus known that it is an obligation for all Muslims to hold fast to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger (peace be upon him) in all their affairs and to refer any issues of disagreement to these two sources, and to be certain that this is the best way and will give the best result in this life and in the Hereafter. 

Obeying the ruler is an obligation but only in that which is Ma'ruf (that which is judged as good, beneficial, or fitting by Islamic law and Muslims of sound intellect) as authentically reported in the Sunnah. This is one of the instances in which a broad statement in the Qur'an has been restricted by the authentic Sunnah reported from the Messenger (peace be upon him), because he is the one who conveyed the Message from Allah and explained His legislation by His Command, as Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-Nahl: "**And We have also sent down unto you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم) the Dhikr [reminder and the advice (i.e. the Qur’ân)], that you may explain clearly to men what is sent down to them, and that they may give thought.**" [Al-Nahl: 44] 

In the same Surah, Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And We have not sent down the Book (the Qur’an) to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم), except that you may explain clearly unto them those things in which they differ, and (as) a guidance and a mercy for a folk who believe.**" [Al-Nahl: 64]

Moreover, Allah (Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-Nisa': "**He who obeys the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), has indeed obeyed Allâh, but he who turns away, then we have not sent you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) as a watcher over them.**" [Al-Nisa: 80]

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) has also explained in Surah Al-A'raf that His supporters and followers are the successful ones. He (Exalted be He) has also clarified that guidance is subsequent to following His Messenger (peace be upon him). Therefore, He (Exalted be He) says: "**So those who believe in him (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), honour him, help him, and follow the light (the Qur’ân) which has been sent down with him, it is they who will be successful. Say (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم): "O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allâh - to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). It is He Who gives life and causes death. So believe in Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), who believes in Allâh and His Words [(this Qur’ân), the Taurât (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel) and also Allâh’s Word: "Be!" - and he was, i.e. 'Isâ (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary), عليهما السلام], and follow him so that you may be guided.**" [Al-A'raf: 157-158]

He (Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Anfal: "**O you who believe! Obey Allâh and His Messenger, and turn not away from him (i.e. Messenger Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) while you are hearing.**" [Al-Anfal: 20] Until His Words: "**O you who believe! Answer Allâh (by obeying Him) and (His) Messenger when he (صلى الله عليه وسلم) calls you to that which will give you life.**" [Al-Anfal: 24] It has been previously mentioned that this great Ayah proves that true life lies in responding to Allah (Exalted be He) and His Messenger (peace be upon him), and that whoever does not respond to Allah (Exalted be He) and His Messenger (peace be upon him) is one of the dead. This is so even if he is alive among the people, since his life will be like that of animals. He (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Nur: "**Say: "Obey Allâh and obey the Messenger, but if you turn away, he (Messenger Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) is only responsible for the duty placed on him (i.e. to convey Allâh’s Message) and you for that placed on you. If you obey him, you shall be on the right guidance. The Messenger’s duty is only to convey (the message) in a clear way (i.e. to preach in a plain way)."**" [Al-Nur: 54] 

In this noble Ayah, He (Glorified be He) has explained that guidance lies in obeying the Messenger and following his teachings. Undoubtedly, the obedience of the Messenger (peace be upon him) is an obedience to Allah (Glorified be He) and following His Glorious Book, as He (Exalted be He) says: "**He who obeys the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), has indeed obeyed Allâh**" [Al-Nisa: 80] 

He (Exalted be He) also says at the end of Surah Al-Nur: "**And let those who oppose the Messenger’s (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) commandment (i.e. his Sunnah - legal ways, orders, acts of worship, statements) (among the sects) beware, lest some Fitnah (disbelief, trials, afflictions, earthquakes, killing, overpowered by a tyrant) should befall them or a painful torment be inflicted on them.**" [Al-Nur: 63] This is a stern warning against anyone who turns away from the commands of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and follows his own desires and whims.

Allah (Exalted be He) says in Surah Al-Fath: "**No blame or sin is there upon the blind, nor is there blame or sin upon the lame, nor is there blame or sin upon the sick (that they go not for fighting). And whosoever obeys Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), He will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers flow (Paradise); and whosoever turns back, He will punish him with a painful torment.**" [Al-Fath: 17] 

Allah (Exalted be He) also says in Surah Al-Hashr: "**And whatsoever the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) gives you, take it; and whatsoever he forbids you, abstain (from it). And fear Allâh; verily, Allâh is Severe in punishment.**" [Al-Hashr: 7]

There are many Ayahs related to obeying Allah (Exalted be He) and His Messenger (peace be upon him) and following the Book of Allah (Exalted be He) and abiding by its guidance. We have already, all praise be to Allah, mentioned many of these Ayahs that suffice in this regard and are persuasive enough for the one who is guided to accept the truth. 

There are many Hadiths in this regard, of which we will mention here as many as we can. For example, it is authentically reported in the Two Sahih (authentic) Books of Hadith (i.e. Al-Bukhari and Muslim) on the authority of Abu Hurayrah (may Allah be pleased with him) that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**Whoever obeys me, obeys Allah, and whoever disobeys me, disobeys Allah, and whoever obeys the ruler (I appoint), obeys me, and whoever disobeys him, disobeys me.**" [^4]

---

[^1]:
[^2]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Tafsir, no. 4497; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 374.
[^3]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 1, p. 465.
[^4]: Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Al-Bay'ah, no. 4193; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 387.
