---
layout: blog
publisher: alsalafiyyah@icloud.com
title: "Allah's Wisdom behind trying His Slaves with calamities and ordeals"
hijri: "Rabi' Al-Awwal 9, 1442 AH"
lang: en
source: "An article issued by the office of His Eminence on 14/3/1402 A.H. no. 91, and Fatawa Al-Shaykh Ibn Baz p. 9/157"
excerpt: "All the signs that happen in this universe that arouse sympathy like thunderbolts, fierce wind, floods that destroy everything, earthquakes that cause great destruction to lofty buildings, great trees, properties and mankind, volcanoes that destroy all that surrounds them, solar and lunar eclipses and other things with which Allah (Exalted be He) tries His servant, are but means of frightening and warning them to give up aggression. This also may urge them to fear Allah (Exalted be He) and return to Him."
active: muqolat
muftis:
  shaykh: 
    - name: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
      url: /biography/binbaz/
---

From [**'Abdul-Aziz ibn 'Abdullah ibn Baz**](/biography/binbaz/) to all Muslims. May Allah help us do what pleases Him and safeguard us against what causes His wrath and punishment! Amen!

As-salamu 'alaykum warahmatullah wabarakatuh (May Allah's Peace, Mercy, and Blessings be upon you!)

Allah (Exalted be He) has bestowed on us many blessings and countless graces. The most important of these graces and blessings is the blessing of Islam. This great blessing has no equal. Whoever understands it and thanks Allah (Exalted be He) for it will be a winner in this world and the hereafter, if he strictly follows it in words and action. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**and if you count the Blessings of Allâh, never will you be able to count them. Verily, man is indeed an extreme wrong-doer, a disbeliever (an extreme ingrate who denies Allâh’s Blessings by disbelief, and by worshipping others besides Allâh, and by disobeying Allâh and His Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم).**" [Ibrahim: 34]

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: "**And whatever of blessings and good things you have, it is from Allâh. Then, when harm touches you, unto Him you cry aloud for help.**" [Al-Nahl: 53]

Therefore, it is incumbent upon all Muslims to thank Allah (Glorified be He) for these bounties and to avoid being ungrateful. Allah (Exalted be He) says while mentioning the bounties He bestows upon His servants: "**And Allâh has brought you out from the wombs of your mothers while you know nothing. And He gave you hearing, sight, and hearts that you might give thanks (to Allâh).**" [Al-Nahl: 78] 

Thanking Allah (Exalted be He) for His bounties in general and in detail protects these bounties and increases them. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed: "If you give thanks (by accepting Faith and worshipping none but Allâh), I will give you more (of My Blessings); but if you are thankless (i.e. disbelievers), verily My punishment is indeed severe."**" [Ibrahim: 7]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Nay! But worship Allâh (Alone and none else), and be among the grateful.**" [Al-Zumar: 66]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Therefore remember Me (by praying, glorifying), I will remember you, and be grateful to Me (for My countless Favours on you) and never be ungrateful to Me.**" [Al-Baqarah: 152]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Work you, O family of Dâwûd (David), with thanks!” But few of My slaves are grateful.**" [Saba: 13]

Moreover, **the Prophet (peace be upon him) advised Mu'adh Ibn Jabal (may Allah be pleased with him) to say this Du'a (supplication) at the end of every Salah (Prayer): "O Allah, help me to mention, thank and worship You in the best manner.**" [^1]

Thanking Allah (Exalted be He) for His bounties and using them in all that pleases Him make things much better and diminishes the effect of evils. 

One of the best and noblest characteristics of the prophets and messengers of Allah and their followers is thanking Allah (Exalted be He) for His bounties and asking for His support. Allah (Exalted be He) says about His prophet Solomon (peace be upon him): "**My Lord! Grant me the power and ability that I may be grateful for Your Favours which You have bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do righteous good deeds that will please You, and admit me by Your Mercy among Your righteous slaves.**" [Al-Naml: 19]

He also said when mentioning His bounties upon His prophet Noah (peace be upon him): "**Verily, he was a grateful slave.**" [Al-Isra: 3]

One of the signs of thanking Allah (Exalted be He) for His blessings is using these blessings in what pleases Him and avoiding what displeases Him. One of the signs of thankfulness is to acknowledge these bounties and attributing them to Allah (Exalted be He) alone away from ostentation or pride especially before those who are deprived of these graces. On the contrary, ingratitude to Allah's bounties and ungratefulness are some of the causes of removing His bounties. Moreover, doing so is considered to be oppression against one's soul. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Indeed he succeeds who purifies his ownself (i.e. obeys and performs all that Allâh ordered, by following the true Faith of Islâmic Monotheism and by doing righteous good deeds). And indeed he fails who corrupts his ownself (i.e. disobeys what Allâh has ordered by rejecting the true Faith of Islâmic Monotheism or by following polytheism or by doing every kind of evil wicked deeds).**" [Al-Shams: 9-10] It means that man disgraces himself by committing evil deeds. Fearing Allah, obeying Him, following His commands and avoiding His prohibitions bring goodness, remove evils and keep Allah's bounties. 

Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And if the people of the towns had believed and had the Taqwâ (piety), certainly, We should have opened for them blessings from the heaven and the earth, but they belied (the Messengers). So We took them (with punishment) for what they used to earn (polytheism and crimes).**" [Al-A'raf: 96]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Verily, Allâh will not change the (good) condition of a people as long as they do not change their state (of goodness) themselves (by committing sins and by being ungrateful and disobedient to Allâh).**" [Al-Ra'ad: 11] 

It is part of Allah's wisdom that He tries His servants with goodness and evil in order that the believer might increase in his belief, reliance and resorting to Allah (Glorified be He). Therefore, believers will exercise patience with what Allah (Exalted be He) predestines in order that their reward might multiply. Trials also make Muslims fear the bad consequences of sins and therefore give them up. Allah (Exalted be He) says:  "**And certainly, We shall test you with something of fear, hunger, loss of wealth, lives and fruits, but give glad tidings to As-Sâbirûn (the patient). Who, when afflicted with calamity, say: "Truly! To Allâh we belong and truly, to Him we shall return." They are those on whom are the Salawât (i.e. who are blessed and will be forgiven) from their Lord, and (they are those who) receive His Mercy, and it is they who are the guided ones." [Al-Baqarah: 155-157]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Or think you that you will enter Paradise without such (trials) as came to those who passed away before you? They were afflicted with severe poverty and ailments and were so shaken that even the Messenger and those who believed along with him said, "When (will come) the Help of Allâh?" Yes! Certainly, the Help of Allâh is near!**" [Al-Baqarah: 214]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Do you think that you will enter Paradise before Allâh tests those of you who fought (in His Cause) and (also) tests those who are As-Sâbirûn (the patient)?**" [Aal Imran: 142] 

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Alif-Lâm-Mîm. [These letters are one of the miracles of the Qur’ân, and none but Allâh (Alone) knows their meanings.] Do people think that they will be left alone because they say: "We believe," and will not be tested. And We indeed tested those who were before them. And Allâh will certainly make (it) known (the truth of) those who are true, and will certainly make (it) known (the falsehood of) those who are liars, (although Allâh knows all that before putting them to test).**" [Al-Ankabut: 1-3]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Verily, Allâh knows those who believe, and verily, He knows the hypocrites [i.e. Allâh will test the people with good and hard days to discriminate the good from the wicked, although Allâh knows all that before putting them to test].**" [Al-Ankabut: 11]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**...and We shall make a trial of you with evil and with good. And to Us you will be returned.**" [Al-Anbiya: 35]

All these Ayahs (Qur'anic verses) point out that Allah (Glorified be He) tries His servants as He did with the preceding nations. If they exercise patience and repent and return to Him with regard to all that befalls them, they will receive His reward, forgiveness and satisfaction and they will be admitted to paradise and compensated with what is better than what they missed.

All the signs that happen in this universe that arouse sympathy like thunderbolts, fierce wind, floods that destroy everything, earthquakes that cause great destruction to lofty buildings, great trees, properties and mankind, volcanoes that destroy all that surrounds them, solar and lunar eclipses and other things with which Allah (Exalted be He) tries His servant, are but means of frightening and warning them to give up aggression. This also may urge them to fear Allah (Exalted be He) and return to Him. These signs also try their patience for what Allah (Exalted be He) predestines. Moreover, the punishment of the hereafter is greater and the command of Allah (Exalted be He) is superior.

When Quraysh belied the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), Allah told His Messenger (peace be upon him) that He had destroyed the nations who belied the previous messengers and prophets. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And how many a generation We have destroyed before them who were stronger in power than they. And (when Our Torment came), they ran for a refuge in the land! Could they find any place of refuge (for them to save themselves from destruction)?**" [Qaf: 36] 

Allah (Exalted be He) revealed after this Ayah His saying: "**Verily, therein is indeed a reminder for him who has a heart or gives ear while he is heedful.**" [Qaf: 37] 

Therefore, it is incumbent upon Muslims to fear Allah (Exalted be He) by following His commands and avoiding His prohibitions. If they are inflicted with any of these calamities, they have to repent and return to Allah (Exalted be He), and to search in themselves for the causes of this trial. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And whatever of misfortune befalls you, it is because of what your hands have earned. And He pardons much. (See the Qur’ân Verse 35:45).**" [Al-Shura: 30]

They have also to repent to Allah (Exalted be He) because of their negligence of doing righteous deeds and their committing of sins. Tawbah (repentance to Allah) repels afflictions. They also have to exercise patience and seek Allah's reward for the calamities they suffered. They have also to repent to Allah (Exalted be He) because of their negligence of doing righteous deeds and their committing of sins. Tawbah (repentance to Allah) repels afflictions. They also have to exercise patience and seek Allah's reward for the calamities they suffered. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**...but give glad tidings to As-Sâbirûn (the patient). Who, when afflicted with calamity, say: "Truly! To Allâh we belong and truly, to Him we shall return." They are those on whom are the Salawât (i.e. who are blessed and will be forgiven) from their Lord, and (they are those who) receive His Mercy, and it is they who are the guided ones.**" [Al-Baqarah: 155-157]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**No calamity befalls, but by the Leave [i.e. Decision and Qadar (Divine Preordainments)] of Allâh, and whosoever believes in Allâh, He guides his heart [to the true Faith with certainty, i.e. what has befallen him was already written for him by Allâh from the Qadar (Divine Preordainments)]. And Allâh is the All-Knower of everything.**" [Al-Taghabun: 11] This means that whoever is afflicted with any of these calamities and believes that it is predestination of Allah (Exalted be He) and receives it with patience seeking His reward, Allah (Exalted be He) will guide his heart to certainty and belief. He also has to realize that what befell him was not to miss him and what missed him was not to befall him. He also believes that Allah (Exalted be He) will compensate him with guidance in his heart and truthful certainty. 

Allah (Exalted be He) may also make up for him what is better than what he missed. Being known through scientific realities and calculations, solar and lunar eclipses or other signs occur by Allah's Might to make His servants fear Him. Therefore, He predestines these signs as He wills. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**No calamity befalls on the earth or in yourselves but it is inscribed in the Book of Decrees (Al-Lauh Al-Mahfûz) before We bring it into existence. Verily, that is easy for Allâh. In order that you may not grieve at the things that you fail to get, nor rejoice over that which has been given to you. And Allâh likes not prideful boasters.**" [Al-Hadid: 22-23]

When a solar eclipse happened during the life time of the Prophet (peace be upon him), he along with the Companions performed Salat-ul-Kusuf (Prayer at the time of a solar eclipse). Then, the Prophet (peace be upon him) delivered an eloquent speech telling his Companions that the sun and the moon are Allah's signs that do not eclipse because of the death or life of anyone. Allah (Exalted be He) sends these signs to make His servants fear Him. Then, he asked them to perform Salah (Prayer), pay charity, pronounce Takbir (saying: "Allahu Akbar [Allah is the Greatest]"), Dhikr (Remembrance of Allah) and Istighfar (seeking forgiveness from Allah) and free slaves. He said in his sermon: "**O followers of Muhammad! By Allah! There is none who has more ghaira (self-respect) than Allah as He has forbidden that His slaves, male or female, commit illegal sexual intercourse. "O followers of Muhammad! By Allah! If you knew that which I know you would laugh little and weep much...**" [^2]

The real life of many Muslims in these days denotes negligence of Allah's rights and paying no attention to what is incumbent upon them with regard to obeying and fearing Allah (Exalted be He). He who ponders on this reality will find many penalties inflicted upon nations and people as floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, famines and devastating wars that annihilate everything. Allah (Glorified be He) points out in His Glorious Book some of the punishments He sends down upon those who disobey His commands and deviate from the right path from among the perished nations who belie Allah's messengers. This is because people may receive admonition and beware of their deeds. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**So We punished each (of them) for his sins; of them were some on whom We sent Hâsib (a violent wind with shower of stones) [as on the people of Lût (Lot)], and of them were some who were overtaken by As-Saihah [torment - awful cry. (as Thamûd or Shu‘aib’s people)], and of them were some whom We caused the earth to swallow [as Qârûn (Korah)], and of them were some whom We drowned [as the people of Nûh (Noah), or Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) and his people]. It was not Allâh Who wronged them, but they wronged themselves.**" [Al-Ankabut: 40]

Sins have bad effects on heart, body and society. They incur Allah's Wrath and Punishment in this world and in the hereafter. No body knows the details of these bad effects and punishment except Allah alone. They bring many kinds of corruption in the earth; in water, air, food, and houses. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Evil (sins and disobedience to Allâh) has appeared on land and sea because of what the hands of men have earned (by oppression and evil deeds), that He (Allâh) may make them taste a part of that which they have done, in order that they may return (by repenting to Allâh, and begging His Pardon).**" [Al-Rum: 31]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**And indeed We punished the people of Fir‘aun (Pharaoh) with years of drought and shortness of fruits (crops), that they might remember (take heed).**" [Al-A'raf: 130]

There is a lesson in these calamities for he whom Allah (Exalted be He) predestined to be a happy person. In general, the evils that occur in this world and the penalties that are carried out in the hereafter are the result of sins and evil deeds. One of the signs of the hardness and rudeness of the heart is hearing Ayahs negligently that talk about these lessons and examples of the perished nations that may cause mountains to humble themselves if they had minds. However, the hard hearts continue with their aggression and sins because of being deceived by the delay of Allah's punishment. They devote themselves to their whims and desires and pay no attention to threat or warning. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Woe to every sinful liar Who hears the Verses of Allâh (being) recited to him, yet persists with pride as if he heard them not. So announce to him a painful torment!**" [Al-Jathiyah: 7-8]

Moreover, persisting on doing sins and evil deeds despite the occurrence of some punishments and penalties for it is a sign of weakness or lack of faith. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Truly! Those, against whom the Word (Wrath) of your Lord has been justified, will not believe. Even if every sign should come to them, until they see the painful torment.**" [Yunus: 96-97]

Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Say: "Behold all that is in the heavens and the earth," but neither Ayât (proofs, evidence, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) nor warners benefit those who believe not.**" [Yunus: 101] 

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**Nay! But on their hearts is the Rân (covering of sins and evil deeds) which they used to earn. Nay! Surely they (evil-doers) will be veiled from seeing their Lord that Day. Then, verily, they will indeed enter (and taste) the burning flame of Hell. Then, it will be said to them: "This is what you used to deny!"**" [Al-Mutaffifin: 14-17]

Our brothers, we have recently watched a horrible catastrophe that has a lesson for he who wants to learn. It is incumbent upon Muslims to take lessons from what happens in this universe. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Then take admonition, O you with eyes (to see).**" [Al-Hashr: 2] We heard on broadcasts, read in newspapers and magazines and watched on televisions what people talk here and there about the earthquakes that happened in Northern Yemen that devastated many towns and villages. It caused the death of many people and destroyed many buildings and properties. Many people were wounded and many families lost their money, homes, offspring and wives. Many women became widows and many children became orphans. All these calamities happened in a short time to denote Allah's Might and power. It also means that people are weak before Allah's Might regardless of the might and power they have attained.

It is obligatory upon all Muslims to learn the lessons from what happened. They also have to repent to Allah (Exalted be He) and return to Him and avoid all that brings His wrath and anger. We supplicate Allah (Exalted be He) to bestow His forgiveness and mercy upon those who died in Yemen because of that catastrophe and to grant people tranquility and consolation. We ask Allah (Exalted be He) to make all the catastrophes they suffered a means of removing their sins, increasing their rewards and ranks and arousing their heedless hearts. We also have to offer them consolation through cooperation and kindness. Moreover, we should offer them charity to sustain them in their calamity and relieve the grave impact of this catastrophe. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**And whatever good you send before you for yourselves, (i.e. Nawâfil non-obligatory acts of worship: prayers, charity, fasting, Hajj and ‘Umrah), you will certainly find it with Allâh, better and greater in reward.**" [Al-Muzzammil: 20]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**...and whatsoever you spend of anything (in Allâh’s Cause), He will replace it. And He is the Best of providers.**" [Saba: 39]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**...and do good. Truly, Allâh loves Al-Muhsinûn (the good-doers).**" [Al-Baqarah: 195] 

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "He who removes from a believer one of his difficulties of this world, Allah will remove one of his troubles on the Day of Resurrection; and he who relieves a person ina crisis, Allah will make things easy for him on the Day of Resurrection; he who covers up (the faults and sins) of a Muslim, Allah will cover up (his faults and sins) in this world and in the Hereafter. Allah supports His slave as long as the slave is supportive of his brother..." [^3] Reported by Muslim. 

The Prophet (peace be upon him) also said: "**Whoever fulfills the needs of his brother, Allah will fulfill his needs**" [^4].

The Prophet (may Allah's Peace and Blessings be upon him) also says: "**A faithful believer to a faithful believer is like the bricks of a wall, enforcing each other.” While saying so the Prophet (peace be upon him) clasped his hands, by interlacing his fingers.**" [^5]

He (peace be upon him) also said: "**The similitude of believers in regard to mutual love, affection, and fellow-feeling is that of one body; when any limb of it aches, the whole body aches, because of sleeplessness and fever.**" [^6]

This Hadith was reported by Al-Bukhary and Muslim. Therefore, we have to support our brothers in Yemen and pay all the charity that we can to achieve the meaning of brotherhood in Islam that was mentioned by the Prophet (peace be upon him) in many Hadiths. We also have to do so in order to obtain the great reward promised by Allah (Exalted be He) for those who spend their money in His cause. May Allah (Exalted be He) grant all Muslims in general and our brothers in Yemen in particular success in forbearance and seeking Allah's reward. We ask Him also to multiply the reward for us and them. We also ask Him to grant those who are injured tranquility and the best consolation. We supplicate Him to grant all Muslims sincere repentance, strictness in following the truth and caution in avoiding all that brings His Wrath and Punishment. He is the guardian and the only One who is able to do this.

As-salamu 'alaykum warahmatullah wabarakatuh (May Allah's Peace, Mercy, and Blessings be upon you!)
 
---
[^1]: Narrated by Al-Nasa'i, Book on Sujud-ul-Sahw, no. 1286; and Abu Dawud, Book on Salah, no. 1301.
[^2]: Narrated by Al-Bukhari, Book on Friday, no. 986; and Muslim, Book on eclipse, no. 1499.
[^3]: Narrated by Muslim, Book on remembrance of Allah, supplication, repentance and seeking forgiveness, no. 4867; and Al-Tirmidhi, Book on righteousness and upholding ties of kinship, no. 1853.
[^4]: Narrated by Al-Bukhari, Book on injustices and unlawful appropriation, no. 2262; and Muslim, Book on righteousness, upholding ties of kinship, and good manners, no. 4677, and the wording is agreed upon.
[^5]: Narrated by Al-Bukhari, Book on Salah, no. 459; and Muslim, Book on righteousness, upholding ties of kinship, and good manners, and it is agreed upon.
[^6]: Narrated by Al-Bukhari, Book on manners, no. 5552; and Muslim, Book on righteousness, upholding ties of kinship, and good manners, no. 4685, and the wording is his.
