---
layout: post
title: "Refuting Salih Muhammad Jamal for his call of the glorification of Islamic monuments"
publisher: "alsalafiyyah@icloud.com"
source: "Majmu' Fatawa Shaykh ibn Baz 1/401"
category: [refutals]
hijri: Muharram 18, 1442 AH
shaykhs: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
---

All praise be to Allah, and peace and blessings be upon the Messenger of Allah, his family, his Companions, and those who follow his guidance.

I have read what was published in Al-Nadwah Newspaper in its issue dated 24/5/1387 A.H., written by Salih Muhammad Jamal entitled "Islamic Monuments." In this article the writer calls for the glorification of Islamic monuments, lest they should be deserted and unknown to the people. The writer says that those who now visit the house once inhabited by Shakespeare in Britain and the house of Beethoven in Germany do not do so out of deification, but out of admiration to what the English poet and the German musician contributed to their countries. These trivial houses cannot be compared to the house of Prophet Muhammad, Dar Al-Arqam ibn Abu Al-Arqam, Thawr Cave, Hira' Cave, and the place where Al-Rudwan Bay`ah (pledge of allegiance) and Al-Hudaybiyah treaty took place, he said. A few years ago, Egypt registered the history of the Sphinx and the glory of the Pharaohs, and tourists came from everywhere to listen to these trivial talks compared to the glory, history, and great people of Islam in all aspects. The writer suggests that Muslims should glorify Islamic monuments that are of greater importance, such as Hira' Cave and Thawr Cave, in addition to the previously mentioned English and German sites, and the glorification of the Egyptian Pharaonic monuments. 

The writer mentions that the Ministry of Hajj and Waqfs (Endowments) should maintain these monuments in cooperation with the Ministry of Education and benefit from them in the following ways:

1. First, registering the history of these monuments using modern techniques that preserve the memories and the glory of Islam embodied in them for centuries, until the end of time.
2. Second, drawing maps to the sites of monuments in both Makkah and Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah.
3. Third, rebuilding what was demolished of these monuments in a style different from the past, and decorating the structures with Ayahs (Qur'anic verses) and Hadiths written on a big chart to record a brief history of the monument in different languages.
4. Fourth, repairing the roads leading to these monuments, especially those in mountains, such as Thawr Cave and Hira' Cave, and facilitating access to them by cable cars like those used to reach the cedar mountains in Lebanon in return for a reasonable fee.
5. Fifth, appointing a student of Islamic studies as a tour guide for each monument in order to clarify the history of the monument to visitors and the noble meanings that can be deduced from it other than Bid`ah (innovation in Islam) and superstitions, or even recording this on tapes that can be used in case of necessity.
6. Sixth, including the history of these monuments in school curricula at different stages.

However, glorifying the Islamic monuments in the ways mentioned by the writer is contradictory to Shari'ah (Islamic Law) and the way of the Salaf (righteous predecessors) and the Imams (leaders) since the era of Sahabah (Companions of the Prophet), until the last of the best generations. It also leads to imitating the Kafirs (disbelievers) in glorifying these monuments; exceeding the proper limits by ignorant people; and spending money in trivial matters. Visitors may think that visiting such monuments is demanded in Shari'ah, while it is one of the innovated Bid'ah means leading to Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship), and imitating the Jews and the Christians in their glorification of monuments of their prophets and righteous people, and using them as places of 'Ibadah (worship) and sightseeing. I thought that I should comment on this article to reveal the truth and resolve the ambiguity by pieces of evidence from Shari`ah and narrations from the Salaf. 

I should also clarify where the context needs clarification. Clarifying ambiguous texts and understanding them in context is very important and one of the best means of leading to Al-Haqq (the Truth), according to the statement of the Prophet (peace be upon him): **'Religion is sincerity.' It was asked, 'For whom?' He (peace be upon him) replied, 'For Allah, His Book, His Messenger, and the Imams (leaders) of Muslims and the laypeople.'** [^1] 

Thus, I say while seeking Allah's help, and there is neither might nor power except with Allah, it was authentically reported from the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) that he said: "**Anyone who introduces anything into this matter of ours (Islam) that is not part of it will have it rejected.**" (Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim). [^2]

In another narration by Muslim: "**Anyone who does an action which is not in accordance with this matter of ours (Islam) will have it rejected.**" [^3]

It is narrated in the Sahih (authentic) Book of Muslim, on the authority of Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him), that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) used to say in his Khutbah (sermon) on Friday, **'The best of speech is the Book of Allah, the best of guidance is the guidance of Muhammad (peace be upon him), the most evil of matters are those which are newly-invented (in religion), and every Bid`ah is a Dalalah (deviation from the right).'** [^4]

There are many Hadiths concerning this point. If these monuments mentioned by the writer such as Hira' Cave, Thawr Cave, the house of the Prophet (peace be upon him), Dar Al-Arqam ibn Abu Al-Arqam, the place where Al-Rudwan Bay'ah took place and others, are glorified, their roads paved, elevators are set up and signs are erected for them, they will not be visited like the monuments of the Pharaohs and those of Kafirs; rather, they will be visited as a form of `Ibadah that draws visitors closer to Allah through them. Thus, we will have added something new to Islam that is not originally part of it, and prescribed for people what Allah has not ordained. 

This is the same Munkar (that which is unacceptable or disapproved of by Islamic law and Muslims of sound intellect) which Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) warns us against in His Statement: "**Or have they partners (with Allâh — false gods) who have instituted for them a religion which Allâh has not ordained?**" [al-Shura: 21]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) also warned us against it in his statement, "**Anyone who introduces anything into this matter of ours (Islam) that is not part of it will have it rejected.**" [^5]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) also stated: **'You will certainly follow the ways of those before you as close as a feather of an arrow is to another, until even if they enter the hole of a lizard, you will enter it too.' People asked, 'O Messenger of Allah! (Do you mean) the Jews and the Christians?' He (peace be upon him) said, 'Who else?'** (Agreed upon its authenticity by Al-Bukhari and Muslim) [^6]

If glorification of the monuments in the way mentioned by the writer had been approved by Allah and His Messenger, he (peace be upon him) would have called to it or would have done it himself, or it would have been done by the Sahabah. As nothing of this took place, it is not part of Islam, but rather a Bid'ah which the Prophet (peace be upon him) warned the Sahabah (may Allah be pleased with them) against. It was authentically reported from Amir Al-Mu’minin (Commander of the Believers) 'Umar ibn Al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) that he condemned pursuing the monuments of prophets and ordered that the tree under which the Bay'ah of Al-Hudaybiyah took place be cut, when he learned that some people began going there. This was meant to protect Tawhid (belief in the Oneness of Allah) and eliminate the means leading to Shirk, Bid`ah and superstitions related to Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic time of ignorance). 

Below is some of what was mentioned by some scholars in this regard, so that you will be well informed about this matter. Imam Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Al-Walid Al-Tartushy said in his book 'Al-Hawadith wal-Bida', a chapter entitled 'A Chapter on Forms of Bid'ah', p. 135, 

> "Al-Ma'rur ibn Suwayd said, 'When we went to perform Hajj with 'Umar ibn Al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him), we saw a Masjid (mosque) on the way, so people began offering Salah (Prayer) in it.' 'Umar said, "O, people! Those who were before you perished because of honoring such sites, until they took them as places of worship. If one arrives there at the time of Salah, one should offer Salah there; otherwise they should leave.'" 

> On p. 141, he said on the authority of Muhammad ibn Waddah that 'Umar ibn Al-Khattab ordered that the tree under which the Prophet (peace be upon him) was given the Bay'ah be cut, because people began to visit it and `Umar feared that they might be misled. Ibn Waddah said: "Malik and other scholars of Al-Madinah hated going to the Masjids and Islamic monuments in Al-Madinah except Quba' and Uhud. Sufyan entered Al-Aqsa Mosque and offered Salah there, but he did not inquire about those monuments or offer Salah there; and others who imitated him did the same." Ibn Waddah then said: "How many matters are now considered acceptable by many people that were once considered Munkar. People try to get closer to Allah through means that drive them further from Allah."

> Shaykh-ul-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah (may Allah be merciful to him) said in his book 'Majmu' Al-Fatawa', Vol. 26, P. 133: "As for climbing Mount Al-Rahmah (at 'Arafah) it is neither an act of Sunnah (supererogatory act of worship following the example of the Prophet) nor Mustahab (desirable). Nor is it Mustahab to enter the dome above it, called the Dome of Adam, to offer Salah there, or circumambulate it, as this is one of the major sins. It is neither Mustahab to enter the Masjids at the place of Jamarat (stone pillars at which pebbles are thrown during Hajj) or offer Salah there. Circumambulation around them, the Stone, the room of the Prophet (peace be upon him) or anything other than the Ka'bah is a grave Bid'ah."

> He also said on p. 144 of the same section, "As for visiting the Masjids that were built in Makkah other than Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the Sacred Mosque in Makkah), such as the one by the foot of Al-Safa, the one by the foot of Abu Qubays, and such Masjids that were built at the sites of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and his Sahabah, such as Masjid Al-Mawlid (the Prophet's birthday) and others, it is neither a Sunnah to visit these places, nor was it preferable by any of the Imams. It is only permissible to visit Al-Masjid Al-Haram in particular, and the sacred ritual places, such as 'Arafah, Muzdalifah, Mina, Al-Safa and Al-Marwah. However, visiting the mountains and areas around Makkah other than 'Arafah, Muzdalifah and Mina, such as Hira' Mountain, the mountain at Mina where it is claimed that there was the sacrifice dome and such places. It is not a Sunnah related to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), but rather a Bid`ah. The same applies to the Masjids built at the sites said to be monuments. The Prophet (peace be upon him) did not permit visiting any of these."

> In vol. 27, p. 134, of the same book, he also said: "Some people might ask whether it is permissible to glorify a place where there is worn-out things and saffron as the Prophet (peace be upon him) was seen there. Glorification of such places and turning them into Masjids is an imitation of the People of the Book whom we are prohibited to imitate. It was authentically reported that 'Umar ibn Al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) was traveling when he saw a group of people hurrying to a place. He asked, 'What is this?' People replied, 'It is a place where the Prophet (peace be upon him) offered Salah.' He said, 'Do you want to turn the sites of your prophet into Masjids? If the time of Salah comes while a person is there, they can offer Salah there; otherwise they should leave.' 'Umar said this in the presence of a number of Sahabah (may Allah be pleased with them). It is known that the Prophet (peace be upon him) used to offer Salah in many places while traveling, and the people would see him in their sleep in different places. However, the Salaf did not turn any of these into Masjids or tourist sites. If this door is opened, many of the Muslim lands will be turned into Masjids and tourist sites, as people still dream that the Prophet (peace be upon him) visits them at home. Establishing such tourist sites is a loathed Bid'ah. Allah has not ordered that the places of prophets be turned into a Musalla (a place for Prayer) except Maqam Ibrahim (the Station of Ibrahim) in His statement: "And take you (people) the Maqâm (place) of Ibrâhîm (Abraham) [or the stone on which Ibrâhîm (Abraham) عليه السلام stood while he was building the Ka‘bah] as a place of prayer (for some of your prayers, e.g. Two Rak‘at after the Tawâf of the Ka‘bahat Makkah)" [al-Baqarah: 125] He has neither ordered that a stone be touched and kissed except Al-Hajar Al-Aswad (the Black Stone in a corner of the Ka'bah), or Salah be directed to a building other than Al-Bayt-ul-Haram (the Sacred House, another name for the Ka'bah). According to the Ijma' (consensus) of the Muslims, it is impermissible to make analogies in this matter. It is tantamount to asking the people to perform Hajj to a place other than Al-Bayt-ul-'Atiq or observe Sawm (fasting) in a month other than Ramadan, and so on." He then said: "The rest of the issues have been definitely answered. If a person offers Salah or recites Du'a (supplication) intentionally at the place of a prophet's footprints or site; the grave of a Sahaby (Companion of the Prophet), a sheikh, or one of Ahl-ul-Bayt (members of the Prophet's extended Muslim family), a tower or a cave, this is a rejected Bid`ah in Islam, as neither the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) nor the early generation of Muslims or those who followed them in righteousness did so. Not one of the Muslim Imams preferred it; rather, it is a means leading to Shirk." There is elaboration on this elsewhere. He then said on p. 500 in the same section, "After Islam, none of the Sahabah used to go to Hira' Cave on purpose. It is impermissible for us to seek the caves of mountains or sit in seclusion there...As for sitting in seclusion in caves and traveling for a mountain to seek blessings, such as Al-Tur Mountain, Mount Hira', Mount Thawr and others, it is impermissible for us. The Prophet (peace be upon him) stated: "Do not set out on a journey except to three Masjids: Al-Masjid Al-Haram, this mosque of mine (the Prophet's Mosque), and Al-Aqsa Mosque (in Jerusalem)." [^7]

> Ibn Al-Qayyim (may Allah be merciful to him) wrote on p. 204 of his book Ighathat Al-Lahfan min Masa'id Al-Shaytan, after warning against visiting graves to seek blessings in them and recite Du'a there: "The Sahabah disapproved of things much more trivial than this. Many people narrated from Al-Ma'rur ibn Suwayd that he offered Fajr (Dawn) Prayer with 'Umar ibn Al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) on the way to Makkah, and then people began spreading everywhere. He asked, 'Where are these people going?' It was said, 'O Amir Al-Mu'minin, they go to offer Salah in a Masjid where the Prophet (peace be upon him) offered Salah.' He said, 'Those who were before you perished because of this; they used to follow the traces of their prophets and turn them into places of 'Ibadah. If the time of Salah comes while you are in such places, offer Salah there; otherwise you should leave, and do not go there intentionally.' 'Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) also uprooted the tree under which the Sahabah made the Bay'ah to the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him)." 

Scholars stated much about this issue. We hope that what we have already mentioned is enough and convincing for those who seek the truth. Having known the previously mentioned pieces of evidence from Shari'ah and the opinions of scholars on this issue, you would know that the call of the writer for glorifying Islamic monuments, such as Thawr Cave, the place where Al-Rudwan Bay'ah took place and others; reconstructing what was demolished of them; paving roads leading to them; making elevators or cable cars for high places such as the two mentioned caves; turning them into tourist sites; erecting signs to them; and appointing tourist guides for the visitors is all contrary to Islamic Shari'ah, which provides for achieving and boosting interests, and preventing and curbing evil, as well as blocking the means leading to Shirk and Bid'ah. 

You would also know that we should prevent Bid'ah and the means leading to Shirk, even if those who call for them have good intentions, as they lead to great evil, change the rites of Islam, and create new places and forms of `Ibadah that were not prescribed by Allah or His Messenger (peace be upon him). Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) states: "**This day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed My Favour upon you, and have chosen for you Islâm as your religion.**" [al-Maidah: 3]

Anything that was not prescribed in the era of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and his Sahabah (may Allah be pleased with them) cannot be made permissible later. If this door is opened, Islam will be misrepresented and innovated ideas will enter it. Muslims will thus become like the Jews and the Christians in their manipulating their faiths and changing them according to their whims and desires. That is why Imam Malik ibn Anas, the Imam of Madinah (may Allah be merciful to him), made a great statement that all the scholars agreed upon, saying: "The last generations of this Ummah (nation) will not succeeded except when they resort to what made the former followers succeed." He meant that what brought success to the first generation was adherence to the Qur'an and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), following their rules and avoiding what contradicts them. The last generations of this Ummah will not succeed unless they resort to what made the former generations succeed.

He (may Allah be merciful to him) has spoken the truth. When people corrupted their faith, created Bid'ah and founded new ways, they divided into different sects, became confused with every sect rejoicing in what they had. Their enemies attacked them, taking advantage of discrepancy among them, weakness of faith, difference in intentions, and fanaticism of every sect to their misleading ways and Bid`ah, until the conditions of the Muslims have reached the current weakness and many nations have attacked them. All Muslims should return to their correct faith adhering to its just rules, learning from the original sources of the Qur'an and the authentic Sunnah, and advising each other accordingly. We must cooperate to achieve this in all fields, whether legislative, economic, political, social or others; and avoid anything that contradicts it or leads to ambiguity. In this manner Muslims will restore their lost dignity and their previous glory, and Allah will make them triumph over their enemies and rule the world.

He (Glorified and Exalted be He) states: "**Allâh has promised those among you who believe and do righteous good deeds, that He will certainly grant them succession to (the present rulers) in the land, as He granted it to those before them, and that He will grant them the authority to practise their religion which He has chosen for them (i.e. Islâm). And He will surely give them in exchange a safe security after their fear (provided) they (believers) worship Me and do not associate anything (in worship) with Me.**" [al-Nur: 55]

He (Glorified be He) also states: "**Verily, Allâh will help those who help His (Cause). Truly, Allâh is All-Strong, All-Mighty. Those (Muslim rulers) who, if We give them power in the land, (they) enjoin Iqamat-as-Salât [i.e. to perform the five compulsory congregational Salât (prayers) (the males in mosques)], pay the Zakât and they enjoin Al-Ma‘rûf (i.e. Islâmic Monotheism and all that Islâm orders one to do), and forbid Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief, polytheism and all that Islâm has forbidden) [i.e. they make the Qur’ân as the law of their country in all the spheres of life]. And with Allâh rests the end of (all) matters (of creatures).**" [al-Hajj: 40-41]

As for the suggestion made by the writer, to include the history of these monuments in the school curricula of different stages, there is no harm in this if its purpose is to call for following the example of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) in enduring grave harm for the sake of calling to Al-Haqq as well as reminding people about his comportment at home, in Dar Al-Arqam, in Thawr Cave and Hira' Cave; and making use of the miracles that took place in Thawr Cave in Makkah, on the way to Hijrah (Prophet's migration to Madinah), and in Madinah. Allah (Glorified be He) protected him from the conspiracies of his enemies throughout the stages of Da`wah (calling to Islam).

There is no doubt that talking about these issues and the miracles they entail, proving the truthfulness of the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) in his call, testifying that he is truly the Messenger of Allah, and that Allah supported him with miracles, all this strengthens Iman (faith) in the hearts and encourages Muslims to imitate the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), follow his example, and endure hardships that might occur, especially those who call to Al-Haqq. The Muslim scholars have realized these noble concepts, wrote many books and treatises about them, and included them in school curricula of different stages. 

Education officials in all Muslim countries should undoubtedly pay attention to this issue and give it its due care, so that the offspring of the Muslims will be well informed about the morals, righteous deeds, long Jihad (fighting in the Cause of Allah) and great patience of their Prophet, the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him), until the end of his life (may Allah's peace and blessings be upon him). May Allah set right the affairs of the Muslims; guide them and their rulers to adhere to the religion of Allah, apply its rulings and follow its straight path, which Allah has set chosen for His servants and upon which the Prophet Muhammad left the people, and by which his Sahabah and their followers led their life. Allah is Omnipotent. 

May Allah's Peace and Blessings be upon His servant and messenger, Muhammad, and upon his family and Companions.

