---
layout: page
title: "Refuting an article which states:'...We should avoid all conflicts between our two religions and work to create an understanding between Muslims and Christians to serve humanity'"
publisher: "alsalafiyyah@icloud.com"
source: "Majmu' Fatawa of Shaykh Ibn Baz 3"
hijri: Muharram 21, 1442 AH
shaykhs: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
---

All praise be to Allah, and peace and blessings be upon the Messenger of Allah, and his family and Companions, and whoever is guided by his guidance. 

I read what was published in issue no. 5785 of the "Al-Madinah" newspaper on 10 Rabi' Thany, 1403 A.H. and the answers given by some writers to the questions asked in the European magazine "Le Viva Romavzin." I found the following paragraph: 

> "**There is a conflict between Christianity and Islam, which I personally condemn, but I have noticed that some Christian missionaries, who deliver their speeches in Third World countries, distribute publications that criticize Islam. I also know that some Muslim preachers print and distribute publications that criticize Christianity. This is very regretful, as Islam and Christianity are two revealed religions, and we both believe in one God. Consequently, we should avoid all conflicts between our two religions and work to create an understanding between Muslims and Christians to serve humanity.**" End quote.

As these words contain obvious mistakes and generalizations, it is incumbent upon me, and others like me, to draw attention to these mistakes, which are in violation of the purified Shari'ah (Divine Law). I, therefore, assert that the conflict between Islam and false religions, such as Judaism, Christianity, Buddhism and others, has continued from the time of Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) up until now. Islam criticizes the Jews and Christians, condemns their ugly actions and speaks out against their Kufr (disbelief) to warn Muslims of them.

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**The Jews say: “Allâh’s Hand is tied up (i.e. He does not give and spend of His Bounty).” Be their hands tied up and be they accursed for what they uttered.**" [al-Maidah: 64]

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: "**Indeed, Allâh has heard the statement of those (Jews) who say: “Truly, Allâh is poor and we are rich!” We shall record what they have said and their killing of the Prophets unjustly**" [Aal Imran: 181]

"**Surely, they have disbelieved who say: "Allâh is the Messiah [‘Isâ (Jesus)], son of Maryam (Mary).**" [al-Maidah: 72]

"**Surely, disbelievers are those who said: “Allâh is the third of the three (in a Trinity).”**" [al-Maidah: 73]

There are many other Ayahs that censure the Jews and Christians, and warn against their false belief. Also, Allah (Exalted be He) says about Mushriks (those who associate others with Allah in His Divinity or worship), such as the Buddhists and others: "**And do not marry Al-Mushrikât (idolatresses, etc.) till they believe (worship Allâh Alone). And indeed a slave woman who believes is better than a (free) Mushrikah (idolatress), even though she pleases you. And give not (your daughters) in marriage to Al-Mushrikûn till they believe (in Allâh Alone) and verily, a believing slave is better than a (free) Mushrik (idolater), even though he pleases you. Those (Al-Mushrikûn) invite you to the Fire, but Allâh invites (you) to Paradise and Forgiveness by His Leave, and makes His Ayât (proofs, evidence, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) clear to mankind that they may remember.**" [al-Baqarah: 221]

He (Exalted be He) also says: "**Verily, those who disbelieve (in the religion of Islâm, the Qur’ân and Prophet Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) from among the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians) and Al-Mushrikûn will abide in the Fire of Hell. They are the worst of creatures.**" [al-Bayyinah: 6]

"**And whoever seeks a religion other than Islâm, it will never be accepted of him, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers.**" [Aal Imran: 85]

There are many other Ayahs with the same meaning. It was authentically reported that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said: "**May Allah curse the Jews and the Christians; they made the graves of their prophets places of worship.**" (Agreed upon by Al-Bukhari and Muslim) [^1]

Also, it was narrated in the Two Sahih (authentic) Books of Hadith (i.e. Al-Bukhari and Muslim) on the authority of 'Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her): "**Umm Habibah and Um Salamah (may Allah be pleased with them both) told the Prophet (peace be upon him) about a church which they saw in Abyssinia (Ethiopia) and the pictures that were in it. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said, 'If a righteous man amongst those people dies, they build a place of worship on his grave, and put those pictures in it. These are the evilest creatures in the Sight of Allah.'**" [^2]

These are many other Hadiths with the same meaning. The Jews abided by the Shari'ah (Divine law) of the Tawrah (Torah), but after Musa (Moses, peace be upon him) died, they changed, altered and distorted it. They divided into seventy-one sects; all of which are in the Fire, except one; the true followers of Musa (peace be upon him). Also, when Allah (Exalted be He) sent 'Isa (Jesus) with the Shari'ah of the Tawrah and revealed the Injil (Gospel) to him, making lawful to the Jews some of what had been forbidden to them and clarifying to them some of what they had differed over, the Jews disbelieved in it, and belied 'Isa (peace be upon him) accusing him of being the son of a prostitute. 

Allah (Exalted be He) belied them and declared their Kufr. He revealed concerning them His Saying: "**Because of their breaking the covenant, and of their rejecting the Ayât (proofs, evidence, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of Allâh, and of their killing the Prophets unjustly**" [al-nisa: 155] until His Saying: "**And because of their (Jews) disbelief and uttering against Maryam (Mary السلام عليهما) a grave false charge (that she has committed illegal sexual intercourse); And because of their saying (in boast), "We killed Messiah ‘Isâ (Jesus), son of Maryam (Mary)"**" [al-Nisa: 156-157]

Likewise, the Christians, when Allah (Exalted be He) raised 'Isa (peace be upon him) to the heavens, disagreed over that and divided into seventy-two sects; all of which shall be in the Fire, except one; those who truly believed in Musa, 'Isa, and all the previous prophets and messengers (peace be upon them all). When Allah (Exalted be He) commissioned His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), all the Jews and Christians, except a few, belied him, and thereby became Kafirs (disbelievers) due to their belying Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and denying his Message. Allah (Exalted be He), therefore, criticized and censured them for this, and threatened them with punishment and the Fire. He (Exalted be He) also declared the Jews and Christians to be Kafirs, because the Jews said that 'Uzayr (Ezra) is the son of Allah while the Christians said that Allah is 'Isa, the son of Maryam, and their saying that Allah is the third of the three (in a Trinity) and the Messiah is the son of Allah. 

It is, therefore, obligatory on the people of Islam to declare the Kufr of those whom Allah and His Messenger declared to be Kafirs, and to expose their falsehood and warn Muslims against their schemes. The religions of the Jews and the Christians have become void religions, it is therefore not permissible to adhere to or abide by them. Allah (Exalted be He) abrogated them by sending His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and ordained humans and Jinn to follow him and adhere to his Shari'ah. 

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**...and My Mercy embraces all things. That (Mercy) I shall ordain for those who are the Muttaqûn (the pious - See V.2:2), and give Zakât; and those who believe in Our Ayât (proofs, evidence, verses, lessons, signs and revelations, etc.) Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) whom they find written with them in the Taurât (Torah) (Deut, xviii 15) and the Injeel (Gospel) (John xiv, 16), - he commands them for Al-Ma‘rûf (i.e. Islâmic Monotheism and all that Islâm has ordained); and forbids them from Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief, polytheism of all kinds, and all that Islâm has forbidden); he allows them as lawful At-Tayyibât (i.e. all good and lawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods), and prohibits them as unlawful Al-Khabâ’ith (i.e. all evil and unlawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons and foods), he releases them from their heavy burdens (of Allâh’s Covenant with the children of Israel), and from the fetters (bindings) that were upon them. So those who believe in him (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), honour him, help him, and follow the light (the Qur’ân) which has been sent down with him, it is they who will be successful.**" [Al-A'raf: 156-157]

These two Ayahs exclude the Jews, Christians, Buddhists, and all Mushriks from Islam and from attaining success, as they do not possess the characteristics with which Allah describes those who will be successful. None of them supported him or followed the light (the Qur'an) which has been sent down with him. They were all hostile to him, except those whom Allah has guided from among them, who will be with the successful Muslims. 

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says after these two Ayahs: "**Say (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم): "O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allâh - to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). It is He Who gives life and causes death. So believe in Allâh and His Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), who believes in Allâh and His Words [(this Qur’ân), the Taurât (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel) and also Allâh’s Word: "Be!" - and he was, i.e. ‘Isâ (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary), عليهما السلام], and follow him so that you may be guided."**" [Al-A'raf: 158]

In this Ayah, Allah (Exalted be He) explains that He sent His Messenger, Muhammad (peace be upon Him), to all people, Arabs and non-Arabs, men and women, Jinn and humans, rich and poor, rulers and subjects. He (Exalted be He) also clarifies that there is no guidance except for those who believe in and follow the Prophet (peace be upon Him). This shows that all the sects that do not believe in him (peace be upon him) and do not follow him are Kafirs and astray.

It was authentically reported that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**The prophet used to be sent just to his own people, but I have been sent to all people.**" (Agreed upon by Al-Bukhari and Muslim) [^3]

It was related in "Sahih Muslim" that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**By the One in Whose Hand is the soul of Muhammad, anyone from this nation, whether a Jew or a Christian, who hears of me and then dies without believing in that with which I have been sent will be one of the people of the Fire.**" [^4]

There are many other Ayahs with the same meaning. Whatever truth the Shari'ah of the Tawrah and Injil contained, the Shari'ah of Muhammad (peace be upon him) also contains it or what is better and more perfect than it, as Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**This day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed My Favour upon you, and have chosen for you Islâm as your religion.**" [Al-Maidah: 3]

Islam is the religion of all the Messengers, as Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**Truly, the religion with Allâh is Islâm.**" [Aal Imran: 11]

He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**And whoever seeks a religion other than Islâm, it will never be accepted of him, and in the Hereafter he will be one of the losers.**" [Aal Imran: 85]

During the time of Nuh (Noah, peace be upon him), Islam was believing in Allah, professing Tawhid (belief in the Oneness of Allah), directing all 'Ibadah (worship) purely and sincerely to Him Alone, believing in Nuh (peace be upon him), and following his Message. Likewise, during the times of Hud, Salih, Ibrahim (Abraham), and the prophets who came after them until and including Musa and 'Isa (peace be upon them all), the religion was Tawhid, being sincere to Allah, believing in the Messenger whom Allah had commissioned, and following the Message he came with.

When Allah sent His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him), the Islam that Allah accepts became the one He divinely revealed to His Prophet, Muhammad (peace be upon him), which is belief in Allah, profession of Tawhid, sincerity in 'Ibadah to Him, belief in His Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him) and what was revealed to him, i.e. the Qur'an and the Sunnah, and belief in those prophets and messengers who were commissioned before him. Whoever follows him and believes in what he came with is a Muslim, whereas whoever deviates from that after they have heard the Da'wah (Call to Islam) is a Kafir. 

It is the duty of Muslims to invite people to Al-Haqq (the Truth), explain Islam and its merits, show its reality to all people in the languages they understand in order to convey the Message of Allah and His Prophet. They must also expose and refute the suspicions that are raised by the enemies of Islam against Islam, and explain their falseness using textual and rational evidence.

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) has obligated all Muslims to support His Religion and His Messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him). He (Exalted be He) has informed that there will be no salvation or success except for those who support and follow Al-Haqq.

Accordingly, it is known that criticizing the Christianity that has been attributed to a so-called son of Allah, clarifying its falsehood and the fact that it is a religion that has been changed and distorted by its people, and later abrogated by sending Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and his Shari'ah is obligatory on Muslims. Christianity is no longer a right religion for us or anyone. The true religion that should be embraced by Muslims and all people is Islam with which Allah sent Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him). Muslims are enjoined to invite others to their religion, defend it, and show the falsity of all religions, including Judaism and Christianity, except Islam. By doing so, they are inviting people to Al-Haqq and Jannah (Paradise), while others are inviting people to the Fire. Allah (Exalted be He) forbade our men to marry Mushrik women and our women to marry Mushrik men, saying: "**Those (Al-Mushrikûn) invite you to the Fire, but Allâh invites (you) to Paradise**" [Al-Baqarah: 221]

Allah (Exalted be He) is inviting people to Jannah and Forgiveness, and to the good deeds that lead to winning them, and so did His Prophet (peace be upon him) and so should the Muslims who are well informed about Islam, who should call others to it using clear evidence. As for the Kafirs, they are only inviting people to Hellfire with their books, publications, and mass media. Accordingly, it becomes clear that it is totally impermissible to say, "Islam and Christianity are two revealed religions", as Christianity is no longer a divinely revealed religion, because it has suffered change and distortion. The truth that was left of it was then abrogated by the guidance and the religion of truth that Allah (Exalted be He) revealed to His Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him).

As for the writer's saying: "**We both believe in one God**", this is only applies to the Muslims, as they believe in, worship, and obey the one God, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He), the Lord and Creator of the heavens, the earth, and everything. Allah (Exalted be He) says in His Truth-Clarifying Book: "**And your Ilâh (God) is One Ilâh (God - Allâh), Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (there is none who has the right to be worshipped but He), the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.**" [al-Baqarah: 163]

He (Glorified be He) also says in His Book: "**Indeed your Lord is Allâh, Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days, and then He rose over (Istawâ) the Throne (really in a manner that suits His Majesty). He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly, and (He created) the sun, the moon, the stars subjected to His Command. Surely, His is the Creation and Commandment. Blessed is Allâh, the Lord of the ‘Alamîn (mankind, jinn and all that exists)!**" [al-A'raf: 54]

"**Allâh! Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), Al-Hayyul-Qayyum (the Ever Living, the One Who sustains and protects all that exists). Neither slumber nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth. Who is he that can intercede with Him except with His Permission? He knows what happens to them (His creatures) in this world, and what will happen to them in the Hereafter. And they will never compass anything of His Knowledge except that which He wills. His Kursî extends over the heavens and the earth, and He feels no fatigue in guarding and preserving them. And He is the Most High, the Most Great. [This Verse 2:255 is called Ayat-ul-Kursî]**" [al-Baqarah: 255]

"**Say (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم): "He is Allâh, (the) One. "Allâh-us-Samad (السيد الذي يصمد إليه في الحاجات) [Allâh the Self-Sufficient Master, Whom all creatures need, (He neither eats nor drinks)]. "He begets not, nor was He begotten. "And there is none co-equal or comparable unto Him."**" [al-Ikhlas: 1-4]

As for the Jews and Christians, they associate others with Allah in worship and do not worship one God. Allah (Exalted be He) says: "**Surely, disbelievers are those who said: “Allâh is the third of the three (in a Trinity).” But there is no Ilâh (god) (none who has the right to be worshipped) but One Ilâh (God - Allâh).**" [al-maidah: 73]

"**And the Jews say: ‘Uzair (Ezra) is the son of Allâh, and the Christians say: Messiah is the son of Allâh. That is their saying with their mouths, resembling the saying of those who disbelieved aforetime. Allâh’s Curse be on them, how they are deluded away from the truth! They (Jews and Christians) took their rabbis and their monks to be their lords besides Allâh (by obeying them in things which they made lawful or unlawful according to their own desires without being ordered by Allâh), and (they also took as their Lord) Messiah, son of Maryam (Mary), while they (Jews and Christians) were commanded [in the Taurât (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel)] to worship none but One Ilâh (God - Allâh) Lâ ilâha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). Praise and glory be to Him (far above is He) from having the partners they associate (with Him).**" [al-Tawbah: 30-31]

In these Ayahs, Allah (Exalted be He) clarifies that the Jews and Christians worshipped many gods, including their rabbis and monks. The Jews also worshipped 'Uzayr whom they claimed to be the son of Allah, while the Christians worshipped 'Isa the son of Maryam whom they claimed to be the son of Allah.

All of them were ordered to worship only one God, Allah (Exalted be He), Who is the Creator and Lord of all things. Glorified and Exalted is He above all that which they associate as partners with Him.

Accordingly, it is not permissible to say about Islam and Christianity as the writer said in his article: "**We should avoid all conflicts between our two religions,**" because Christianity is not a religion for us, Islam is our only religion. Christianity, as was stated previously, has become an invalid religion, and the truth that was in it is either included in the Shari'ah revealed to Muhammad (peace be upon him) or it came with what is better and more perfect than it. Muslims, therefore, accept it for being part of the Message of Islam that Allah revealed to our Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) and not because it was stated in the Tawrah or Injil, rather, because our Islamic Shari'ah includes and enjoins it.

With these brief words, I wanted to clarify what was written by this writer and warn against the mistakes that were mentioned by him, for fear that people may have been deceived by his article. This is my discharge of the duty of sincere advising, as Allah (Exalted be He) obliges all Muslims, especially the people of knowledge, to give advice. It was reported that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: '**The religion is sincerity (in advice, acts, etc.).' They said, 'To whom, O Messenger of Allah?' He (peace be upon him) answered, 'To Allah, His Book, His Messenger, and the Imams (leaders) of Muslims and their common people.**' (Related by Muslim in his Sahih) [^5]

Also, it was narrated in the Two Sahih Books of Hadith on the authority of Jarir ibn 'Abdullah Al-Bajaly who said: "**I gave the oath of allegiance to the Prophet (peace be upon him), pledging to perform Salah (Prayers), pay Zakah (obligatory charity), and be sincere towards every Muslim.**" [^6]

Also, I gave it to be saved from the sin of concealing truth against which Allah (Exalted be He) warns saying: "**Verily, those who conceal the clear proofs, evidence and the guidance, which We have sent down, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book, they are the ones cursed by Allâh and cursed by the cursers. Except those who repent and do righteous deeds, and openly declare (the truth which they concealed). These, I will accept their repentance. And I am the One Who accepts repentance, the Most Merciful.**" [al-Baqarah: 159-160]

I ask Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) to help us all, the writer of the article, and all the Muslims to understand and remain steadfast in His Religion, and give advice to Allah's Servants. Also, we supplicate to Allah to protect us from the evils of ourselves, the wickedness of our deeds, and speaking about Him or His Prophet without knowledge. May peace and blessings be upon our Prophet Muhammad, and his family and all his Companions.

---

[^1]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Salah, no. 436; Muslim, Sahih, Book on Masjids and places for Salah, no. 529; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Masjids, no. 703; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 6, p. 146; and Al-Darimy, Sunan, Book on Salah, no. 1403.
[^2]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on funerals, no. 1341; Muslim, Sahih, Book on Masjids and places for Salah, no. 528; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Masjids, no. 704; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 6, p. 51.
[^3]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Tayammum, no .335; Muslim, Sahih, Book on Masjids and places for Salah, no. 521; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Ghusl and Tayammum, no. 432; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 3, p. 304; and Al-Darimy, Sunan, Book on Salah, no. 1389.
[^4]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on faith, no. 153; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 350.
[^5]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on faith, no. 55; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Al-Bay'ah, no. 4198; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on manners, no. 4944; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 4, p. 102.
[^6]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Zakah, no. 1401; Muslim, Sahih, Book on faith, no. 56; Al-Tirmidhy, Sunan, Book on righteousness and upholding ties of kinship, no. 1925; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Al-Bay'ah, no. 4175; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 4, p. 364; and Al-Darimy, Sunan, Book on transactions, no. 2540.
