---
layout: post
title: "Refuting Mustafa Amin"
publisher: "alsalafiyyah@icloud.com"
source: "Majmu' Fatawa wa Maqalat p. 1/391"
category: [refutals]
hijri: Muharram 17, 1442 AH
date: 2020-09-05
shaykhs: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz Ibn Baz
---

All praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds, peace and blessings be upon the Honest Prophet Muhammad. 

I have perused the article published in Al-Nadwah Newspaper, issue dated 24/6/1380 A.H., titled "Sights of Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah" by Mustafa Amin. Considering the mentioned article, I found many mistakes that should be highlighted lest readers should be deceived by them. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**Religion is sincerity (in advice, acts and so on).**" [^1]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) also said: "**Whoever among you sees something evil, let him change it by his hand (by action), and if he cannot, then by his tongue (by speaking out), and if he cannot, then by his heart (by hating it and feeling that it is wrong), and that is the weakest of faith.**" [^2]

Dear reader, here are the mistakes and their refutations:

> First: He said in respect of Al-Madinah: "This sacred city contains many monumental sights. We, Arabs, do not pay due attention to them. While visiting Paris and London we see how their people preserve these memorials. So, why do we, Muslims, not care about the monuments of the past ages,"... until he said, "Islam calls for...", etc. 

By these words, the writer invites us to imitate the people of Paris and London in the act of glorifying these sights and building memorials for them. It is strange and wondrous that a Muslim invites others to imitate the enemies of Allah. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**Whoever imitates a people is one of them.**" [^3]

O dear reader, glorifying monuments is not by building memorials, inscriptions, and following in the footsteps of non-Muslims. The true celebration of these monuments is to follow in the footsteps of the people who did these brilliant exploits, to imitate their good morality, and their struggle in the Cause of Allah patiently and sincerely with words and actions. This is the way that the Salaf (righteous predecessors) used to glorify the good deeds of their predecessors. As for glorifying monuments by buildings, decorations and inscriptions, it is against the way of the Salaf. It is rather the way of the Jews, the Christians, and those who imitate them. Indeed, it is one of the gravest means to Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship) and the worship of prophets and Awliya' (pious people) as shown by reality and by the Hadiths and the traditions reported in the books of Sunnah. So be careful and cautious! It is true that the Muslims should be ready beforehand for any hostility they may face. Thus, they should found factories for the benefit of their communities and invent weapons suitable for the time, not as an imitation of non-Muslims, but because we obey Allah and his Messenger and follow the way of the Salaf and Sahabah (Companions of the Prophet) and those who followed their way. 

The basic proof can be found in Allah's saying: "**O you who believe! Take your precautions**" [al-Nisa: 71]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**And make ready against them all you can of power**" [al-Anfal: 60]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**A strong believer is better and dearer to Allah than a weak believer, and there is goodness in each. Be keen on that which gives you benefit (in the Hereafter) and seek help from Allah and do not lose heart.**" [^4]

There are many Ayahs and the Hadiths in this regard. They all indicate that Muslims should establish factories, armaments, and foundations of good life in order to meet their needs and help themselves defend the truth against falsehood, protect their interests, support their religion, and restore their previous glories, and resist any hostility against them or their religion. This is the true meaning, O Mustafa Amin, of glorifying the monuments, not by buildings which you mentioned or the like. May Allah help us.

> Second: The writer said, "Knowledge does not make Taqwa (fear or wariness of offending Allah) lie in weakness or fear, but rather in exploring the universe and scrutinizing its hidden and manifest secrets..."

Yes. True Taqwa should not be in weakness, fear or being backward in the fields of reform as well as public and private interests. It should be a means to reflect upon the universe in order to realize Allah's Wisdom in creation and laws. The pious must be the bravest and the most keen on reform, for fear of Allah entails so. But the writer's words give the false impression that Taqwa is confined to knowledge of the universe and its secrets and following the example of those who reached the highest levels in this field. Rather, knowledge of the secrets of the universe is only part of Taqwa. Taqwa, as defined by Muslim scholars, means to abide by what Allah has commanded and abandon what He has forbidden out of faith, sincerity, devotion, love, desire and fear.

This includes giving much care to public interests, establishing beneficial facilities, and following the example of the Salaf (righteous predecessors) and pious scholars who preceded us in this field. There is nothing wrong in benefiting from the technologies achieved by other nations in fathoming the secrets of the universe and other fields of knowledge that do not violate the purified Shari'ah (Islamic law) but protect it from the plot of its enemies and fulfill the needs of its people. It is the duty of Muslims to benefit from these technologies, not by way of imitation of non-Muslims, but because Islam commands its followers to be heedful of what is beneficial to them and keep away from what is harmful, as previously mentioned. The inventions of the non-Muslims, who reached the farthest point in this regard, have only pushed them to more Kufr (disbelief), atheism and corrupted morals. So people must not be fascinated by their knowledge and should not imitate them in their morals or their way of dressing that contradict the teachings of Shari'ah. 

We should only take of their technologies that which is beneficial and urgently needed along with abiding by the teachings of our Shari`ah and being aware of anything that goes against it. So dear reader, be careful of this in order to be saved from many errors and doubts - may Allah guide us to the straight path.

> Third: The writer also said, "It is the duty of those who visit the grave of the master of martyrs (i.e. Hamzah, may Allah be pleased with him) to follow his example and to know that Allah will reward the visitors for the burden they undertake to reach that place and take a lesson of Jihad (striving or fighting in the Cause of Allah), not for just visiting the graves, seeking blessings, and supplicating.... Hamzah (may Allah be pleased with him) is an ideal example of Jihad...."

This speech combines true and wrong statements. As for the right side, it encourages the visitors of the grave of Hamzah ibn 'Abdul-Muttalib as well as the visitors of other graves to recall to memory their glorious exploits when they were alive such as Jihad, Da'wah (calling to Islam), and giving much care to public interests. They must follow their example. This truth must be recalled by every Muslim. Muslims must follow the example of those people in their entire life and try to be like them as much as they can. [^5]

As for his statement that Allah does not reward the visitor for mere visiting, seeking blessings and supplication, this is a blatant error that contradict with Sahih (authentic) Hadiths reported from the Prophet (peace be upon him) in which he said: "**Visit the graves, for they remind you of the Hereafter.**" [^5] According to other narrations: "**..and make you renounce worldly things.**" [^6]

The texts reported from the Prophet (peace be upon him) in this context indicate that the significance of visiting graves is to remember the Hereafter, keep from indulgence in worldly pleasures, and pray to Allah for forgiveness to the buried people. The writer overlooked this point entirely and encouraged another point reported in other Hadiths. If he had combined both points, he would not have missed the truth. As for visiting the graves for seeking blessings, this is not permissible in Islam. Indeed, it is one of the acts of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic time of ignorance) and a characteristic of grave worshipers. So, we must be aware of such acts and prohibit visitors from committing this.

It is authentically reported in Sahih Muslim on the authority of Buraydah (may Allah be pleased with him) that he said: "**The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) used to teach his Companions to recite the following when visiting the graves, 'Peace be upon you, the inhabitants of the graves of the believers and Muslims, and Allah willing we shall join you. We pray to Allah for well-being for ourselves and for you.'**" [^7]

In Jami' Al-Tirmidhy, it is related from Ibn 'Abbas (may Allah be pleased with him and his father) that he said: "**The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) passed by the graves of Al-Madinah and said, 'Peace be upon you, O dwellers of the graves. May Allah forgive you and us. You have preceded us, and we are to follow.'**" [^8]

This is the Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be upon him) in visiting graves, and it teaches the purpose of visiting them. As for seeking blessings from them, building over them, inscribing on them and heading to them for supplication, this is not an act of Sunnah. Rather, this is one of the traditions of the Jews, Christians, and the people of Jahiliyyah. We ask Allah to grant us and all Muslims safety.

> Fourth: The writer mentioned in his article that some Islamic nations have taken their kings as gods and made some of the righteous Muslims as intercessors who draw them nearer to Allah, and founded for them domes and built Masjids (mosques) over their graves, not to eternize their glorious actions but to be places for worshiping the dead and beseeching Allah by them. He added that if they had built the domes and Masjids to eternize the glorious actions of the dead, it would have been better...etc. 

This, however, combines both truth and falsehood. As for the truth, it is the writer's admittance that these acts of Bid'ah (innovation in religion) exist in some Islamic countries and his criticism of building domes over graves and Masjids as niches for worship and supplication to the dead. In fact, this is true and rampant in the neighboring countries. Indeed, we belong to Allah, and indeed to Him we will return. We ask Allah to protect Muslims from this and to grant them understanding of religion with which He sent Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) in order to know that these innovations go against Shari'ah and lead to worshiping people instead of Allah. Falsehood lies in the writer's differentiation between building domes and Masjids for worship and supplication, and making them memorials. This distinction has no basis in religion. 

Moreover, it contradicts the texts of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, which indicate the impermissibility of building domes or Masjids for this reason. This is because building domes and Masjids over graves for worshiping, supplicating, and seeking help from the dead is an act of Shirk as the people of Jahiliyyah did with Al-Lat, Al-'Uzza, Manah and other idols. Indeed, building such memorials is a means to worshipping the occupants of the graves along with Allah. The Qur'an and the Sunnah condemn, warn, and prohibit these means of Shirk. 

It is authentically reported in the Two Sahih books of Hadith (Al-Bukhari and Muslim) from 'Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) that the Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**May Allah curse the Jews and Christians, for they made the graves of their prophets as places of worship." Aishah (may Allah be pleased with her) said, 'The Prophet (peace be upon him) was warning against doing what they did. Except for this reason, his grave would have been made prominent but he feared lest it should be taken as a Masjid.'**" [^9]

According to a report in Sahih Muslim on the authority of Jundub ibn 'Abdullah (may Allah be pleased with him), the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said: "**Beware of those who preceded you and used to take the graves of their prophets and righteous men as places of worship. You must not take graves as Masjids; I forbid you to do that.**" [^10]

It is also narrated in Sahih Muslim on the authority of Jabir (may Allah be pleased with him) that "**the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) forbade plastering graves, sitting on them, and building over them.**" [^11]

These Hadiths and others, which were related in the same context, indicate the prohibition of building domes and Masjids for this reason. The Prophet (peace be upon him) warned his nation against doing that to differ from the Jews and Christians who excessively glorified the dead, built places of worship on their graves, offered prayers for and supplicated to them. Thus, the Muslims may not fall prey to the means of Shirk and worshiping the prophets and the righteous people besides Allah, as happened with other nations. 

This is the matter the Prophet (peace be upon him) feared and warned his nation against, but people have fallen into Bid`ah and glorified the dead from among prophets and pious people in a way that goes against the Law of Allah. They built places of worship and domes over their graves and directed their supplications and entreaties to them until they fell into Shirk - there is neither might and nor strength except in Allah. It is related in the Two Sahih books of Hadith from Um Salamah and Um Habibah (may Allah be pleased with them) that they saw in Abyssinia (Ethiopia) a church, called Mariyah, with pictures therein. They mentioned this to the Prophet (peace be upon him) who said: "**When a pious person among those people died, they built a place of worship on his grave, and then decorated it with such pictures. They are the worst of creatures in the Sight of Allah.**" [^12]

The Prophet (peace be upon him) explained that the people who build Masjids and domes over graves as well as those who make idols in them are the worst people in the Sight of Allah. He cursed them in the Hadith of 'Aishah and did not differentiate between those who built them for worship and those who took them as memorials. Therefore, building domes and Masjids over graves is not permissible, because they are a big means to Shirk. It is also a tradition of the Jews and the Christians which we are prohibited to follow. The Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**'You would follow the ways of those who came before you step by step to such an extent that if they were to enter a lizard's hole, you would enter it too.' They said, 'O Messenger of Allah, (do you mean) the Jews and the Christians?' He (peace be upon him) replied, 'Who else?' (i.e. of course, the Jews and the Christians.)**" (Related by Al-Bukhari and Muslim) [^13]

This authentic narration indicates that the nation will follow the way of the Jews and the Christians in Shirk and Bid`ah except those whom Allah protects, i.e. the victorious sect as related in another Hadith. The Hadith also warns against following the behaviors of the Jews and Christians, because following them leads to disobeying the Messenger (peace be upon him). Allah (Glorified be He) commands people, in His Book, to obey the Prophet (peace be upon him) and avoid what he has forbidden: "**And whatsoever the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) gives you, take it; and whatsoever he forbids you, abstain (from it). And fear Allâh; verily, Allâh is Severe in punishment.**" [al-Hashr: 7]

Allah (Exalted be He) also says: "**And let those who oppose the Messenger’s (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) commandment (i.e. his Sunnah - legal ways, orders, acts of worship, statements) (among the sects) beware, lest some Fitnah (disbelief, trials, afflictions, earthquakes, killing, overpowered by a tyrant) should befall them or a painful torment be inflicted on them.**" [al-Nur: 63]

There is no doubt that the Prophet (peace be upon him) called his nation to all good and warned them against all evil, so it is not permissible for those who believe in Allah and the Last Day to stray from his way or call to other than his way. It is undoubtedly true that building Masjids and domes over graves is one of the acts of the Jews and the Christians and a means to Shirk and deviation that we must avoid. May Allah grant us success.

> Fifth: The writer said: "Likewise, Al-Baqi' (the graveyard of Madinah, near the Prophet's Mosque), the plot of land where the wives and aunts of the Prophet (peace be upon him), his son Ibrahim, and some of his Sahabah (Companions) were buried. There were domes that were built therein until the guided state rose and removed the domes but left the graves unmarked. Hundred thousands of people who visit Al-Masjid Al-Nabawi (the Prophet's Mosque in Madinah) also visit the people of Al-Baqi' without knowing the graves of those whom Allah has chosen and favored over servants, such as the Prophet's wives, his son Ibrahim, and scores of Sahabah. What about if the Administration of Awqaf (Endowments) set marks on these graves to show the names of the dead and also fence them to make it easy to recognize their graves..."

The writer invites the Administration of Awqaf in Al-Madinah to set gravestones for the famous Sahabah buried in Al-Baqi` and to build fences around their graves to recognize them. This suggestion may come out of good intentions, but any opinions or recommendations are not acceptable until a person examines them in the light of the Qur'an and the Sunnah of the Prophet (peace be upon him). Perhaps, when the writer wrote these words, he did not know about the ruling that has been reported in authentic Hadiths from the Prophet (peace be upon him) concerning graves. Thus, he committed such mistakes including this last error when he suggested that the Administration of Awqaf should undertake the previous suggestion. 

It is previously stated in the authentic Hadith that the Prophet (peace be upon him) forbade building on graves. There is no doubt that constructing fences around them is a form of building and a means of over veneration. Placing tombstones with grave notes is one of the means of over veneration and taking those servants (of Allah) as idols, because when some ignorant people read the names of the buried Sahabah and know them by names, they may glorify them because they are of the Prophet's family. They may seek their blessings and wipe their hands in the soil of their graves, as many people do in neighboring countries. It is authentically reported that the Prophet (peace be upon him) has forbidden writing on graves or building Masjids or constructing structures over them, according to the previous Hadiths

The Prophet (peace be upon him) said so only to protect Tawhid (belief in the Oneness of Allah), block the means to Shirk, in order to protect the nation from the errors of the Jews and Christians as well as the idol worshipers in many Arabian tribes. The Prophet (peace be upon him) conveyed the message, rendered the trust and advised his nation. The purpose of visiting the people of Al-Baqi' is to supplicate to Allah to forgive them and to recall the Hereafter, as previously mentioned. This is achieved by Allah's Will, even if the visitor does not know their names. There is no need for the writer's suggestion to set marks or build fences around their graves. If there is good for Muslims in doing this, the pious Salaf and their followers would have done it, because they were more knowledgeable of Shari'ah, more heedful of acting according to it, and more loving and protective to the Prophet's wives and his family. Since they did not do this and were satisfied with the old situation, which was at the time of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, it became evident that what people innovated after them, such as building and writing is a forbidden Bid`ah. Be heedful, O dear reader of doubts and Bid'ah.

Surely, Allah is the only Guide to the straight path. Callers to Shirk from among the Jews and Christians and those who follow their path from this nation who call the people to beliefs and practices that violate the teachings of the Prophet (peace be upon him) and spread destructive ideas intentionally or unintentionally. Consequently, falsehood has spread and the truth became hidden to many people. Callers of guidance and advocates of Shari'ah decreased, while those who claim they have knowledge and the supporters of Shirk and callers of vice increased. Indeed, Allah Alone is Sufficient for us, and He is the Best Disposer of affairs for us. Hence, good readers and guided scholars should know that they must exert a lot of effort to call to the true Islam that is pure from any Shirk or Bid'ah. 

We must spread the beauty of Islam, its just rulings, high objectives, and easy teachings among the classes of nations, communities, gatherings, and the media, so that those who are ignorant will be informed, those who are inattentive pay attention, those who are forgetful remember and those who spread misguidance will stop their plots against Islam and the rulings of Shari'ah which take place before the eyes and ears of scholars. When the callers of Islam exert efforts to support Islam, the callers of Shirk, atheism, Bid`ah and desires fade away, their fire is put out and they stay away from the pulpits of enlightenment. 

They may return to the true path and support its people when they know the truth and when doubts and misguidance are removed from their hearts. It is necessary that Muslims give advice in religion just as many scholars and reformers do in these days. I wish them all success, steadfastness and more power and activity in seeking the truth and destroying the forts of falsehood and aberrance. I found it necessary for those who contribute to this field from smart readers and prominent scholars to be active and break into these fields with sincerity, bravery, sure knowledge and forbearance, in order to support their religion, protect their Shari`ah, and guide people to the straight path.

They will have the same reward of their followers until the Day of Recompense. The truthful Prophet (peace be upon him) said: "**If anyone calls others to follow right guidance, his reward will be equivalent to those who follow him in righteousness without the least decrease in their own reward in any respect.**" [^14]

May Allah guide us and all Muslims to His Path and protect us all from the way of those upon whom Allah has invoked His Wrath and those who went astray. Indeed, He is Capable of all things. May peace be upon his servant and Messenger Muhammad, his family, and Companions.

---

[^1]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on faith, no. 55; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Al-Bay`ah, no. 4198; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on manners, no. 4944; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 4, p. 102.
[^2]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on faith, no. 49; Al-Tirmidhy, Sunan, Book on trials, no. 2172; Al-Nasa'i', Sunan, Book on faith and its laws, no. 5008; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on Salah, no. 1140; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Book on performing Prayer and its Sunan, no. 1275; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 3, p. 10.
[^3]: Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on clothing, no. 4031.
[^4]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on destiny, no. 2664; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Introduction, no. 79; and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 370.
[^5]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on funerals, no. 976; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 2034; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 3234; Ibn Majah, Sunan, the narrations concerning the funerals, no. 1569; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 441.
[^6]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on remembrance of Allah, supplication, repentance and seeking forgiveness, no. 2742; Al-Tirmidhy, Sunan, Book on trials, no. 2191; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Book on trials, no. 4000; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 3, p. 61.
[^7]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on funerals, no. 975; Al-Nasa'i', Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 2040; Ibn Majah, Sunan, narrations concerning the funerals, no. 1547; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 5, p. 353.
[^8]: Al-Tirmidhy, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 1053.
[^9]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Salah, no. 436; Muslim, Sahih, Book on Masjids and places for Salah, no. 529; Al-Nasa'i', Sunan, Book on Masjids, no. 703; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 6, p. 146; and Al-Darimy, Sunan, Book on Salah, no. 1403.
[^10]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on Masjids and places for Salah, no. 532.
[^11]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on funerals, no. 970; Al-Tirmidhy, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 1052; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 2027; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 3225; Ibn Majah, Sunan, Book on funerals, no. 1563; Book on remembrance of Allah, supplication, repentance and seeking forgiveness, 3, p. 339.
[^12]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on Salah, no. 434; Muslim, Sahih, Book on Masjids and places for Salah, no. 528; Al-Nasa'i, Sunan, Book on Masjids, no. 704; and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 6, p. 51.
[^13]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Book on holding fast to the Book and the Sunnah, no. 7320; Muslim, Sahih, Book on knowledge, no. 2669; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 3, p. 84.
[^14]: Muslim, Sahih, Book on Knowledge, no. 2674; Al-Tirmidhy, Sunan, Book on Knowledge, no. 2674; Abu Dawud, Sunan, Book on Sunnah, no. 4609; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 2, p. 397; and Al-Darimy, Sunan, Introduction, no. 513.
