---
layout: post
published: false
publisher: alsalafiyyah@icloud.com
title: "Ruling on beseeching the Messenger for help"
date: 
hijri: Muharram 21, 1442 AH
source: ""
lang: en
category: [shirk]
note: false
excerpt: "It is a fact that such doing was the essence of the Din (religion) of the early Mushriks (those who associate others with Allah in His Divinity or worship) of the Kafirs (disbelievers) of Quraysh and others."
muftis:
  shaykh: 
    - name: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
      url: /biography/binbaz/
---

Q: What is the ruling on those who call the Prophet (peace be upon him) saying: "Help us, O Messenger of Allah" or "Help us, O Prophet"? 

Shaykh Ibn Baz: Saying such phrases is a sort of major Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship), for it signifies seeking help from the Prophet (peace be upon him). It is worth mentioning that scholars amongst the Sahabah (Companions of the Prophet, peace be upon him) and their followers agreed that seeking help from the dead whether prophets or not, the absent angels, Jinn (creatures created from fire), etc., or idols, stones, trees, or stars etc, is a form of major Shirk. Allah (Glorified be He) says: {{"And the mosques are for Allâh (Alone): so invoke not anyone along with Allâh. " [Al-Jinn: 18]}} Allah (Glorified be He) also says: {{"Such is Allâh, your Lord; His is the kingdom. And those, whom you invoke or call upon instead of Him, own not even a Qitmîr (the thin membrane over the date-stone). If you invoke (or call upon) them, they hear not your call; and if (in case) they were to hear, they could not grant it (your request) to you. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will disown your worshipping them. And none can inform you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) like Him Who is the All-Knower (of everything). " [Fatir: 13-14]}} Besides, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: {{"And whoever invokes (or worships), besides Allâh, any other ilâh (god), of whom he has no proof; then his reckoning is only with his Lord. Surely! Al-Kâfirûn (the disbelievers in Allâh and in the Oneness of Allâh, polytheists, pagans, idolaters) will not be successful." [Al-mu'minun: 117]}}

There are many other Ayahs (Qur'anic verses) to the same effect. It is a fact that such doing was the essence of the Din (religion) of the early Mushriks (those who associate others with Allah in His Divinity or worship) of the Kafirs (disbelievers) of Quraysh and others. However, Allah (Exalted be He) sent all messengers (peace be upon them all) and revealed Divine Books to condemn and warn against seeking the help of others besides Allah. He (Glorified be He) says: {{"And verily, We have sent among every Ummah (community, nation) a Messenger (proclaiming): “Worship Allâh (Alone), and avoid (or keep away from) Tâghût (all false deities i.e. do not worship Tâghût besides Allâh).”" [Al-Nahl: 36]}}  Allah (Glorified be He) also says: {{"And We did not send any Messenger before you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) but We revealed to him (saying): Lâ ilâha illa Ana [none has the right to be worshipped but I (Allâh)], so worship Me (Alone and none else)." [Al-Anbiya: 25]}} Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: {{"(This is) a Book, the Verses whereof are perfected (in every sphere of knowledge), and then explained in detail from One (Allâh), Who is All-Wise, Well-Acquainted (with all things). (Saying) worship none but Allâh. Verily, I (Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم) am unto you from Him a warner and a bringer of glad tidings." [Hud: 1-2]}} Moreover, Allah (Glorified be He) says: {{"The revelation of this Book (the Qur’ân) is from Allâh, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise. Verily We have sent down the Book to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم) in truth: So worship Allâh (Alone) by doing religious deeds sincerely for Allâh’s sake only. Surely the religion (i.e. the worship and the obedience) is for Allâh only. And those who take Auliyâ’ (protectors, helpers, lords, gods) besides Him (say): "We worship them only that they may bring us near to Allâh." Verily Allâh will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ. Truly, Allâh guides not him who is a liar, and a disbeliever." [Al-Zumar: 1-3]}} Allah thus clarifies in the Ayahs quoted above that He (Exalted be He) sent His Messengers and revealed His Books in order for people to worship Him Alone and associate no partner with Him. Allah thus revealed His Din in order for people to offer all sorts of `Ibadah (worship) such as Du`a (supplication), seeking help, fearing the Creator, having hope in His Mercy, Salah (Prayer), Sawm (Fast), slaughtering sacrifices, vowing etc. To Him Alone. Besides, Allah (Exalted be He) clarifies that the Mushriks of Quraysh along with other Mushriks used to tell messengers and people who called them to the truth: (... We worship them only [i.e. False protectors, helpers, lords, and gods] that they may bring us near to Allah...)

This signifies that though they worshiped their false helpers to draw them closer to Allah and to intercede for them not because they believed that their false protectors could create, provide sustain, or run the affairs of the universe; Allah (Glorified be He) belies them and declares them as Kafirs for doing so. 

He (Glorified be He) so says: {{"Verily, Allâh will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ. Truly, Allâh guides not him who is a liar, and a disbeliever." [Al-Zumar: 3]}} He (Glorified be He) thus explains that what Mushriks declare that they worship their false helpers, because they draw them closer to Allah is just a lie and that such people are considered Kafirs for doing so. 

He (Glorified be He) thus says: {{"Verily, Allâh will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ. Truly, Allâh guides not him who is a liar, and a disbeliever." [Al-Zumar: 3]}} In addition, Allah (Glorified be He) points out in another Ayah (Qur'anic verse) in Surah (Qur'anic chapter) Yunus that such Mushriks claim that their false gods are their intercessors with Allah. In this context, the Qur'an reads: {{"And they worship besides Allâh things that harm them not, nor profit them, and they say: “These are our intercessors with Allâh.”" [Yunus: 18]}} Again, Allah (Glorified be He) considers them liars and says: {{"...Say: “Do you inform Allâh of that which He knows not in the heavens and on the earth?” Glorified and Exalted is He above all that which they associate as partners (with Him)!" [Yunus: 18]}}

Moreover, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) clarifies in Surah Al-Dhariyat that He created both Jinn (creatures created from fire) and mankind in order for them to worship Him Alone and associate nothing with Him. He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: {{"And I (Allâh) created not the jinn and mankind except that they should worship Me (Alone)." [Al-Dhariyat: 56]}} All Jinn and mankind have thus to worship Allah Alone, be totally devoted to Him, and beware of worshiping others besides Him (Exalted be He) whether prophets or others. They should not seek their help or offer any kind of `Ibadah to them.

This is to act upon the Ayahs mentioned above and the similar ones and in conformity with what is authentically reported from our Prophet and all other prophets (peace be upon them all) that they called people to Tawhid (belief in the Oneness of Allah), worshiping Allah Alone, and associating no partner with Him. In fact, this is the essence of Islam with which Allah sent all different messengers, revealed all different Divine Books, and for which He (Glorified be He) created Jinn and mankind. Accordingly, whoever seeks the help of prophets or anybody else or offers any kind of `Ibadah to them is considered associating partners with Allah and is meant by Allah's saying: {{"But if they had joined in worship others with Allâh, all that they used to do would have been of no benefit to them." [Al-An'am: 88]}} And {{"And indeed it has been revealed to you (O Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), as it was to those (Allâh’s Messengers) before you: "If you join others in worship with Allâh, (then) surely (all) your deeds will be in vain, and you will certainly be among the losers." [Al-Zumar: 65]}} Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: {{"Verily, Allâh forgives not that partners should be set up with Him (in worship), but He forgives except that (anything else) to whom He wills" [Al-Nisa: 48]}} Allah (Glorified be He) also says: {{"Verily, whosoever sets up partners (in worship) with Allâh, then Allâh has forbidden Paradise to him, and the Fire will be his abode. And for the Zâlimûn (polytheists and wrong-doers) there are no helpers." [Al-Ma'idah: 72]}} No one is excluded from the foregoing proofs except those whom Da`wah (calling to Islam) did not reach because of their being very far away from Muslim territories to the extent that they did not know about the Qur'an and Sunnah. Such people will be judged by Allah (Glorified be He). However, the proper opinion regarding people who did not know about Da`wah is that they will be tested on the Day of Resurrection. If they obey Allah's Command, they will be rewarded in Jannah (Paradise) and vice versa. The same applies to children of Mushriks who died before reaching puberty for there are two proper opinions concerning them:

First: They will be tested on the Day of Resurrection. If they obey, they will be rewarded in Jannah and vice versa. Proof of this view is that when the Prophet (peace be upon him) was asked about them, he said: {{"Allah knows what sort of deeds they would have done." (Agreed upon by Imams Al-Bukhari and Muslim)[1]}}. This means that when they are tested on the Day of Resurrection, Allah's knowledge about them will be known (to His creatures).

Second: That they will be amongst the dwellers of Jannah as they die on Al-Fitrah (true faith of Islam to worship none but Allah) before reaching the age of Taklif (being held legally accountable for actions). Moreover, it is authentically reported that the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him) said: {{"Every child is born on Al-Fitrah." [2]}} According to another narration: {{"[Every child is born] following this faith (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone) but his parents convert him to Judaism, Christianity, or Magainism." [3]}} Besides, it is authentically reported that the Prophet (peace be upon him) saw prophet Ibrahim (Abraham, peace be upon him) in one of the gardens of Jannah along with children of Muslims and those of Mushriks.

Anyway, the foregoing second opinion is the most proper one on the children of Mushriks for the proofs mentioned above and because Allah (Glorified be He) says: {{"And We never punish until We have sent a Messenger (to give warning)." [Al-Isra: 15]}} In addition, Al-Hafizh Ibn Hajar (may Allah be merciful to him) mentioned in his Book Al-Fath vol. 3, p. 247 while explaining the book of "Funeral processions" chapter on: "Opinions on children of Mushriks": "This view (the second one we quoted here) is the chosen proper view according to verifying scholars."

Finally, it is permissible for a person to seek the help of another while the latter is alive, present, and normally able to help. Doing so is not Shirk, as Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says regarding the story of prophet Musa (Moses, peace be upon him) with the Coptic: {{"The man of his (own) party asked him for help against his foe" [Al-Qasas: 15]}} This is also because every human being needs to be helped by others with regard to different things that can not be done on an individual basis such as Jihad (fighting/striving in the Cause of Allah) etc. Seeking such help is not then a form of Shirk. It is permissible and even may be recommended or Wajib (obligatory) cooperation according to Shar`y (Islamic legal) proofs regarding different situations. May Allah grant us success. 
