### The book titled "Al-Salah Al-Ilahiyyah Al-Kubra"
######  Fatwa al-Lajnah ad-Daimah wal-Ifta' no. 47621 

#### Question: 
I brought this book to you; it is entitled "Al-Salah Al-Ilahiyyah Al-Kubra" i.e. (The Greater Divine Prayer). I have read some strange things in it. I hope you will read it and explain the ruling on following the orders mentioned in it and the ruling on printing, distributing and publishing this book.

#### Answer: 
After reading this book, it became clear to us that it contains issues in religion tantamount to associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship and Bid'ahs (innovations in religion). One of the invocations that involve Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship) is the saying "allahuma salli 'ala Ghayth Al-Mustaghithin" i.e. (O Allah! Send Your Blessings upon the only one who gives succor to those in need of help) on pages 71, 85, 87, 88 and the saying: "fardina ya rasul-Allah", "istaghfir lana", and "ishfa' lana ila rabbika" i.e. (Make us pleased, O Messenger of Allah), (Seek Allah's Forgiveness for us), and (Intercede with your Lord for us) respectively, as on page 77. One of the invocations that involve Bid'ahs (innovations in religion) is the saying: "ya man 'ilmuhu bi hali yughnihi 'an su'ali" i.e. (O You the One Whose knowledge of my situation makes Him not in need to my invocation) and repeating it many times.
 
Also, the following invocation is Bid'ah: "salli 'ala sayyidna wa mawlana Muhammad bi qadr 'azhamat (la ilaha illa Allah subhanaka inni kuntu mina al-zhalimin) i.e. (O Allah send Your blessings upon our master and lord Muhammad as befits the greatness of the saying: "There is no god but Allah. Praise be to You. Indeed, I have been of the wrongdoers) and repeating it many times, the saying: "ya man laysa yusafu bi qiyam wala qu'ud, wala harakah wala jumud" i.e. (O You Who cannot be described as standing, sitting, moving nor staying still) on page 32, the saying: "wa an tajma'ani bihi- yaqzatan wa manaman" i.e. (to gather me with him -that is, with the Messenger (peace be upon him) - in wakefulness and in sleep) on page 64 and 84, the saying: "bi sirri asrar al-fatihah ila hadrat al-nabi wa al baytihi biniyyat al-qabul" i.e. (by the secret of Al-Fatihah [the Opening chapter of the Qur'an] to the presence of the Prophet [peace be upon him] and his household with the intention of acceptance) on page 68, the saying: "ya man idha i'taqda fika al-muhibbu laka bi 'adhamat jahik wa makanatika 'inda Allah ta'ala bi sidq al-niyyah yunal kula al-murad, ya man idha tawajjaha bika mu'min sadik ila Allah fi ijabat du'a'ihi wa su'alihi qabilahu Allah" i.e. (O you who, if the one who loves you, follows you by the greatness of your honor and place in the sight of Allah (Exalted be He), by the sincerity of intention, will get all that he desires. O you, who if a true believer invokes Allah with him to answer his invocation, Allah will answer it) on page 72, the saying: "alahumma inni waqif amam nabiyyaka wa habibika sayyidi wa shafi'i rasulu-Allah mutawajjihan bihi ilayka. Allahumma inni atawajjahu ilayka bi nabiyyika nabiyy al-rahmah. Ya sayyidi ya rasulu-Allah inni mutawjjih bika ila rabi fi hawa'iji lituqda" i.e. (O Allah I am standing before Your Prophet and Beloved being, my master and intercessor, the Messenger of Allah [peace be upon him] invoking You by him, O Allah I invoke You with Your Prophet, the Prophet of Mercy, O my master Messenger of Allah, I invoke my Lord with you to have my needs fulfilled) on page 78 and 79, and the saying: "wa lawlak lam yakhluq allahu ardan wa la sama' kayfa wa lawlak lam yursil Allah al-anbiya'" i.e. (But for you Allah would not create the earth or the sky. Why not, if, but for you, Allah would not create the prophets) on page 73. This is exaggeration and it is not permissible to exaggerate in belief in the Prophet (peace be upon him).

At the end of this book, there are some pictures of relics that are ascribed to the Prophet (peace be upon him) and some of them are mere lies and others lack proof. According to what is mentioned above, it is not permissible to use this book because it contains wrong information and exaggeration in Du'a (supplication). Allah (Exalted be He) says, "Invoke your Lord with humility and in secret. He likes not the aggressors." [al-A'raf: 55] 

When offering this act of worship (Du'a (supplication)), the Muslim has to adhere to the sanctified Shari'ah and not innovate in it. The invocations in the Qur'an and the Sunnah and other permissible invocations that contain no violations or innovations are sufficient for the person instead of these books and publications. Since this book contains what we previously explained, it is not permissible to print, publish, sell or distribute it; because this involves cooperation in sin, leading people astray, calling people to believe in Bid`ah (innovation in religion) and exaggeration in their belief in the Prophet (peace be upon him). 
