---
layout: post
publisher: alsalafiyyah@icloud.com
title: "Clarification of the rulers' rights upon the Ummah"
hijri: "Dhul-Qa'dah 30, 1441 AH"
source: "Majmu' Fatawa Wa Maqalat 9/93"
lang: en
category: [rulership, hisbah, khawarij]
note: false
uid: clarification-the rulers-rights-upon-ummah
excerpt: "Iit is the duty of all Muslims in this kingdom to cooperate with this country and whoever calls to Allah everywhere in reinforcing good, observing Da'wah to Allah, spreading Islam, and calling to Al-Haqq, for this should also be followed by all countries."
muftis:
  shaykh: 
    - name: Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz
      url: /biography/binbaz/
---

**His Eminence, Shaykh Abdul-Aziz ibn Baz the Grand Mufti of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has shed light upon rulers' rights and the necessity of obeying them in that which does not involve disobedience to Allah, he quoted Ayahs from the Qur'an and Hadiths mentioned to this effect. Moreover, his Eminence cited the basis of Islamic Da'wah (call to Islam) in Saudi Arabia and warned against false and misleading calls, describing their advocates as being callers to great evil. This was mentioned during a seminar held in Al-Jami' Al-Kabir (the Grand Masjid (mosque) in Riyadh on Thursday night 1/5/1417 a.h. entitled: "Clarification of rulers' rights upon the Ummah (nation of creed) by evidence from the Qur'an and Sunnah, and explaining the consequences of violating this" where he said:**

Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all worlds. The good end shall be for Al-Muttaqin (pious people), may peace and blessings be upon His beloved Prophet and the one entrusted with His Revelation our Prophet, Imam (leader) and Master; Muhammad ibn 'Abdullah, his family, Companions and whoever follows his path and is directed by his guidance until the Day of Resurrection, to continue:

There is no doubt that Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) has commanded us to obey rulers, cooperate with them in virtuousness and Taqwa (fearing Allah has He should be feared), as well as recommending them to observe Al-Haqq (the Truth) and endure it, for He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**O you who believe! Obey Allâh and obey the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), and those of you (Muslims) who are in authority. (And) if you differ in anything amongst yourselves, refer it to Allâh and His Messenger (صلى الله عليه وسلم), if you believe in Allâh and in the Last Day. That is better and more suitable for final determination.**" [Al-Nisa: 59]

This is the way of happiness and guidance; observing obedience to Allah and His Messenger in everything. However, obedience of the rulers in Ma'ruf (that which is judged as good, beneficial, or fitting by Islamic law and Muslims of sound intellect) is an act of obedience to Allah and His Messenger, this is why He (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**Obey Allâh and obey the Messenger (Muhammad صلى الله عليه وسلم), and those of you (Muslims) who are in authority.**" [Al-Nisa: 59]

Obedience of the ruler comes next to the obedience of Allah and His Messenger. The commanders and scholars should be obeyed in that which is Ma'ruf. But, if they enforce an act of disobedience to Allah, they should not be obeyed regardless of the posts they occupy; a commander, king, scholar, president or whatever, according to the saying of the Prophet (peace be upon him): "**Obedience is obligatory only in what is good (and reasonable)**" [^1] 

Moreover, Allah says, addressing the Prophet (peace be upon him): "**...and that they will not disobey you in Ma‘rûf (Islâmic Monotheism and all that which Islâm ordains)**" [Mumtahanah: 12] 

He (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: "**So keep your duty to Allâh and fear Him as much as you can; listen and obey; and spend in charity; that is better for yourselves.**" [Al-Taghabun: 16]

In this Ayah, Allah has ordained Muslims to observe Taqwa, to hear and obey, but only in Ma'ruf. Texts explain and support each other in this regard. Accordingly, it is obligatory upon all those who are legally accountable for their actions to cooperate with rulers in good, obey in Ma'ruf and watch their tongues with respect to the means to corruption, evil, disunity and dissolution. For this reason, Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**(And) if you differ in anything amongst yourselves, refer it to Allâh and His Messenger (صلى الله عليه وسلم)**" [Al-nisa: 59] i.e. refer the ruling to the Qur'an and Sunnah of His Messenger (peace be upon him) in following Al-Haqq and gathering good as well as warning against evil, this is the path of the people of guidance and Mu'minin (believers).

However, whoever wants to suppress the truth, call to evil and corruption and spread whatever involves slander whether it is true or false, this is the path of mischief, disunity and Fitan (trouble and trials). On the other hand, people of goodness and Taqwa spread good and call to it, they also recommend each other to observe it. This leads to the achievement of welfare, harmony, unity, and cooperation in virtuousness and Taqwa, for Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) says: "**Help you one another in Al-Birr and At-Taqwâ (virtue, righteousness and piety); but do not help one another in sin and transgression.**" [Al-Maidah: 2]

He (Glorified be He) also says: "**By Al-‘Asr (the time). Verily, man is in loss, Except those who believe (in Islâmic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, and recommend one another to the truth [i.e. order one another to perform all kinds of good deeds (Al-Ma‘ruf) which Allâh has ordained, and abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds (Al-Munkar which Allâh has forbidden], and recommend one another to patience (for the sufferings, harms, and injuries which one may encounter in Allâh’s Cause during preaching His religion of Islâmic Monotheism or Jihâd).**" [Al-Asr: 1-3]

Furthermore, it is evidently recognized that Muslim rulers who are aware of the limits of Allah, support Al-Haqq, defend the oppressed, solve problems, implement the Hudud (ordained punishments for violating Allah’s Law) and the Qisas (just retaliation) in addition to providing the means to safety and punishing the oppressor and wrongful, in addition to other interests that bring great welfare, goodness and guidance. Yet, rulers make mistakes, for infallibility is only attained by messengers (peace be upon them) regarding what they inform people from Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He). However, we should cooperate with them in what is good and provide them with advice against any potential evil or defect, for this should be the conduct of Mu'minin. This is what the Messenger (peace be upon him) had ordained upon us to do, to hear and obey rulers and advise them, as he (peace be upon him) said: "**Verily Allah likes three things for you and disapproves of three things for you. He is pleased with you that you worship Him and not associate anything with Him, that you hold fast to the rope of Allah, and be not scattered, and that you give advice to the one to whom Allah gives command over you...**" [^2]

And He (peace be upon him) says: "**The Din (Religion of Islam) is sincere advice, he repeated it thrice. We said: To whom? He said: To Allah, His Book, His Messenger, to the leaders of Muslims and their common folks**" [^3] 

He (peace be upon him) had also said: "**Whoever observes an act of disobedience to Allah committed by their commander, should abhor this act, but never refrain from obeying him (i.e., the commander)**" [^4]

And when he was asked about rulers who do not fulfill their duties, he (peace be upon him) said: "**Fulfill the rights upon you and ask Allah for your rights**" [^5] 

How much better would it be, if those rulers were keen on establishing Al-Haqq and justice, supporting the oppressed and holding back the oppressor as well as ensuring safety and preserving people's lives, Din (religion of Islam), money and honor. If this is the case, we should cooperate with them in enforcing good and abandoning evil. Moreover, we should persist in recommending and advising each other to truth so as to restrict evil and spread virtue. 

Apart from this, Allah has bestowed upon these countries the call of Imam (leader) shaykh Muhammad ibn 'Abdul-Wahhab (may Allah be merciful to him), along with the support of the grandmother of this dynasty Imam Muhammad ibn Sa'ud (may Allah be merciful to him) to this call, which had lead to the spread of great benefit, knowledge, Haqq (truth) and guidance, as well as the elimination of Shirk (associating others with Allah in His Divinity or worship) and its means, in addition to the suppression of different forms of corruption, Bida' (innovations in religion) and misleading acts that were quite known to scholars who had been patient with this call, participated in it and supported its advocates. As a result, this country became an exemplary model in observing Tawhid (belief in the Oneness of Allah/ monotheism) and devotion to Allah, refraining from Bida', sins, and means to Shirk until the emergence of the well known Fitnah (trial) because of which, that call was attacked, then Allah brought it all together once more through Imam Turky ibn Abdullah ibn Muhammad ibn Sa'ud (may Allah be merciful to him), then his son Imam Faysal ibn Turki, then his grandson Abdullah ibn Faysal ibn Turki, afterwards a took place after the death of Imam Abdullah ibn Faysal (may Allah be merciful to him), after which Allah brought king Abdul-Aziz by whom He had availed all Muslims, reunited them, uplifted the truth, supported the Din, promoted enjoining right and forbidding evil, in addition to other untold bounties and knowledge which were attained through him, such as establishing justice and standing up for truth as well as spreading Da'wah to Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He). His sons kept this going after him.

Therefore, it is the duty of all Muslims in this kingdom to cooperate with this country and whoever calls to Allah everywhere in reinforcing good, observing Da'wah to Allah, spreading Islam, and calling to Al-Haqq, for this should also be followed by all countries. Each country should call for implementing Al-Haqq, judge according to Allah's Shari'ah (Islamic law), and support His Din. However, Saudi Arabia, is a blessed country which Allah has rendered as a source of support to Al-Haqq and Din, and a cause for uniting people, eliminating the reasons of corruption, achieving security in countries, and a cause for the occurrence of great bounties, yet, it is fallible, imperfect, and surely suffers from defects. Therefore, we should cooperate with it to eliminate the deficiency, and amend the faults by consultation, recommending one another to the truth, using good means of communication such as correspondence or visits rather than referring to evil, lies, and transmitting false speeches. However, whoever seeks to clarify and call to the Haqq should act towards eliminating deficiencies by lawful good means such as recommending and advising each other to truth, for this is the conduct of Muslims and the ruling of Islam. 

This is the way for whoever wants the welfare of this Ummah; that is to clarify and call for good and Haqq, as well as cooperating with rulers in amending the deficiencies and faults. Allah has recommended us to do this in His Saying (Glorified be He): "**Help you one another in Al-Birr and At-Taqwâ (virtue, righteousness and piety); but do not help one another in sin and transgression. And fear Allâh. Verily, Allâh is Severe in punishment.**" [Al-maidah: 2]

He (Glorified be He) also says: "**By Al-‘Asr (the time). Verily, man is in loss, Except those who believe (in Islâmic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, and recommend one another to the truth [i.e. order one another to perform all kinds of good deeds (Al-Ma‘ruf) which Allâh has ordained, and abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds (Al-Munkar which Allâh has forbidden], and recommend one another to patience (for the sufferings, harms, and injuries which one may encounter in Allâh’s Cause during preaching His religion of Islâmic Monotheism or Jihâd).**" [Al-Asr: 1-3] 

For verily, the Din is sincerity, thus it is a necessity to help rulers in declaring and calling to Al-Haqq, as well as deterring and eliminating falsehood, spreading virtuousness and fighting vice by legal means.

Moreover, the citizens should cooperate with rulers, authorities, and whoever calls to Al-Haqq to declare it, eliminate mischief and corruption. This is what all Muslims should do by the lawful means prescribed by Allah in His Saying (Glorified be He): "**Invite (mankind, O Muhammad صلى الله عليه و سلم) to the Way of your Lord (i.e. Islâm) with wisdom (i.e. with the Divine Revelation and the Qur’ân) and fair preaching, and argue with them in a way that is better.**" [Al-Nahl: 125]

Allah (Glorified be He) also says: "**And who is better in speech than he who [says: “My Lord is Allâh (believes in His Oneness),” and then stands firm (acts upon His Order), and] invites (men) to Allâh’s (Islâmic Monotheism), and does righteous deeds**" [Fussilat: 33]

In addition to His Saying (Glorified be He): "**And argue not with the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), unless it be in (a way) that is better (with good words and in good manner, inviting them to Islâmic Monotheism with His Verses), except with such of them as do wrong**" [Al-Ankabut: 46]

Allah (Glorified be He) also says: "**And by the Mercy of Allâh, you dealt with them gently. And had you been severe and harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from about you**" [Aal Imran: 159] 

And in His Saying (Glorified and Exalted be He) to Musa (Moses) and Harun (Aaron) when He sent them to Fir'awn (Pharaoh): "**And speak to him mildly, perhaps he may accept admonition or fear (Allâh).**" [TaHa: 44]

As for what is observed now by some people like Muhammad Al-Mis'ary, Sa'ad Al-Faqih and others amongst those who spread corrupt calls, this is undoubtedly a great evil and corruption. Therefore, we should beware of their calls, eliminate them and should not cooperate with them (people) in anything which leads to corruption, evil, falsehood and Fitnah, for Allah has ordained us to help one another in virtuousness and Taqwa rather than evil, transgression, spreading lies and false claims which cause disunity and disorder. Publications such as those issued by Al-Faqih, Al-Mis'ary or others of those who call to falsehood, evil and disunity should be eliminated, destroyed and disregarded. Those people should be advised, guided to Al-Haqq and warned against this falsehood, it is also impermissible for anyone to cooperate with them in this evil, for they should recover their senses and abandon such false claims. 

My advice for Al-Mas'ary, Al-Faqih, Ibn Laden and whoever follows their path is to abandon this noxious way, fear Allah and beware of His Wrath and Punishment. Not only should they do this, but also repent to Allah of their past deeds, and surely He will accept their Tawbah (repentance), since He (Glorified be He) has promised this to His Servants in addition to being good to them according to His Saying (Glorified be He): "**Say: "O ‘Ibâdî (My slaves) who have transgressed against themselves (by committing evil deeds and sins)! Despair not of the Mercy of Allâh: verily, Allâh forgives all sins. Truly He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. "And turn in repentance and in obedience with true Faith (Islâmic Monotheism) to your Lord and submit to Him (in Islâm) before the torment comes upon you, (and) then you will not be helped.**" [Al-Zumar: 53-54]

He (Glorified be He) also says: "**And all of you beg Allâh to forgive you all, O believers, that you may be successful**" [Al-Nur: 31] There are many Ayahs which stress this meaning.

To sum up, it is obligatory upon all Muslims to cooperate with rulers in good, guidance and uprightness to achieve welfare, settle security, eliminate injustice, support the oppressed and fulfill their rights. They should also cooperate with judges, Du'ah (callers to Islam) and whoever seeks reform in finding Al-Haqq, calling to it, deterring the oppressive people and establishing the Rulings of Allah, also in enjoining good, forbidding evil and suppressing falsehood. Moreover, people should help each other and advise whoever deviates from Al-Haqq to return to the path of righteousness to achieve goodness and attain public interests, besides eliminating corruption, mischief, evil and disunity with all provided legal means. However, people will continue to attain good as long as they recommend each other to virtue, help one another in virtuousness and Taqwa, but if they help each other in falsehood and transgression, adversities will prevail, security will no longer exist, falsehood will dominate and Al-Haqq will be buried, and this is the aim of the devils among the humans and Jinn (creatures created from fire). 

Accordingly, people should beware of what they invite to, they should also take all the means to ensure the prevalence of security, virtue and guidance as well as advising each other to cooperate with rulers in whatever is good and helping whoever calls to this, as well as establishing Allah's Rules, supporting Al-Haqq, and assisting whoever wants to make reform and refute and warn against oppression and the means leading to disunity and disparity.

This is mandatory, as declared by Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He): "**Help you one another in Al-Birr and At-Taqwâ (virtue, righteousness and piety); but do not help one another in sin and transgression. And fear Allâh. Verily, Allâh is Severe in punishment.**" [Al-Maidah: 2]

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: "**By Al-‘Asr (the time). Verily, man is in loss, Except those who believe (in Islâmic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, and recommend one another to the truth [i.e. order one another to perform all kinds of good deeds (Al-Ma‘ruf) which Allâh has ordained, and abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds (Al-Munkar which Allâh has forbidden], and recommend one another to patience (for the sufferings, harms, and injuries which one may encounter in Allâh’s Cause during preaching His religion of Islâmic Monotheism or Jihâd).**" [Al-Asr: 1-3]

Allah (Glorified and Exalted be He) also says: "**And hold fast, all of you together, to the Rope of Allâh (i.e. this Qur’ân), and be not divided among yourselves**" [Aal Imran: 103] 

This is the way to salvation, true Iman (faith/belief), righteous deeds and a good end, accordingly, good will prevail, cooperation in virtuousness and Taqwa will be achieved and evil will be refuted, leading all countries to become secure in a way that restrains the perverse and returns rights back to their owners. We ask Allah by His Beautiful and Sublime Names and Attributes to direct everyone to good, grant them the comprehension of the Din, adjust the conditions of all Muslims, protect them and us from the evil of our own souls, misdeeds and from following lusts, as I ask Him to protect us from the straying Fitan (seditions), guide our rulers to what is good, help them in virtue and support Al-Haqq through them, and help them and whoever assists them to profoundly understand the Din, achieve whatever is good, and to guard them against that which contradicts Allah's Shari'ah, and render us of those who guide and are guided.

Finally, I ask Him (Glorified be He) to set right the conditions of all Muslims everywhere, grant them good understanding of their Din, let the best among them rule over them, and better their leaders, gather Muslims to Al-Haqq and Guidance, He is All-Hearer, Ever Near. May peace and blessings be upon our Prophet Muhammad, his family, and Companions!

---

[^1]: Narrated by Al-Bukhari, Book on judgments, no. 6612; Muslim, Book on rulership, no. 3424; Al-Nasa'i, Book on Al-Bay'ah, no. 4134; Abu Dawud, Book on Jihad, no. 2256; and Ahmad in Musnad, Section on the Hadiths narrated by the ten Companions promised Paradise, no. 686.
[^2]: Narrated by Imam Ahmad, Rest of the section on the Hadiths narrated by the Companions who narrated a large number of Hadiths, no. 8444; and Malik, Al-Muwatta*, Book on miscellaneous matters, no. 1572.
[^3]: Narrated by Al-Tirmidhy, Book on righteousness and upholding ties of kinship, no. 1849; Al-Nasa'i, Book on Al-Bay'ah, no. 4128; and Abu Dawud, Book on manners, no. 4293.
[^4]: Narrated by Muslim, Book on rulership, no. 3448; and Ahmad, Rest of the section on Al-Ansar, no. 22856.
[^5]: Narrated by Muslim, Book on trials, no. 2116, with the wording: &quot;Give them their rights and ask Allah for that which is yours; &quot;and Ahmad, Section on the Hadiths narrated by the Companions who narrated a large number of Hadiths, no. 3458.
